[PAGE 1] A micro channel-cut crystal X-ray monochromator for a self-seeded hard X-ray free-electron laser Taito Osaka,a,* Ichiro Inoue,a Ryota Kinjo,a Takashi Hirano,b Yuki Morioka,b Yasuhisa Sano,b Kazuto Yamauchib and Makina Yabashia,c aRIKEN SPring-8 Center, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan, bDepartment of Precision Science and Technology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan, cJASRI, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5198, Japan. E-mail: osaka@spring8.or.jp Synopsis A channel-cut Si(111) crystal X-ray monochromator with a channel width of 90 µm was developed for achieving reflection self-seeding in hard X-ray free-electron lasers. A high conversion efficiency of a monochromatic seed from a broadband X-ray beam was experimentally evaluated to be ~ 2 × 10–2 with a small optical delay of 119 fs at 10 keV. Abstract A channel-cut Si(111) crystal with a channel width of 90 µm was developed for achieving reflection self-seeding in hard X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs). With the crystal, a monochromatic seed pulse is produced from a broadband XFEL pulse generated in the first-half undulators with an optical delay of 119 fs at 10 keV. The small optical delay allows a temporal overlap between the seed optical pulse and the electron bunch by using a small magnetic chicane for the electron beam at the middle of the undulator section. A peak reflectivity reached 67%, which is a reasonable value as compared with the theoretical one of 81%. By using this monochromator, a monochromatic seed pulse without broadband background in spectrum was obtained at SACLA with a conversion efficiency from a broadband XFEL pulse of ~ 2 × 10–2, which is ~ 10 times higher than that of transmission self-seeding using a thin diamond (400) monochromator. Keywords: XFEL; self-seeding; channel-cut crystal 1. Introduction X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs) operating in the self-amplified spontaneous emission (SASE) scheme (Kondratenko & Saldin, 1980; Bonifacio et al., 1984) have generated hard X-ray beams with unique characteristics, such as ultrahigh peak power, nearly full transverse coherence, and ultrashort pulse duration at the femtosecond level (Huang & Kim, 2007). In the SASE scheme, spontaneous

[PAGE 2] radiation emitted from an electron bunch with a random statistical modulation of the beam density is amplified while propagating through a periodic magnetic field in long undulators. The stochastic nature, however, causes poor longitudinal coherence and a broad spectrum with a relative bandwidth of ~ 0.3% (Saldin, 1999). A monochromator is widely used to monochromatize SASE-XFEL pulses, whereas the photon flux is considerably decreased by a factor of ~ 30. To generate intense and narrowband XFEL pulses in the hard X-ray regime, a self-seeding scheme has been proposed (Feldhaus et al., 1997). In this scheme, a monochromator is placed at the middle of a magnetic chicane of the electron bunch, which separates the undulators into two sections. A monochromatic seed pulse is produced from a broadband SASE-XFEL pulse generated in the first undulator section through the monochromator. At the same time, the electron bunch is detoured in the magnetic chicane, and then spatiotemporally overlapped with the seed pulse downstream of the chicane. Finally, the seed pulse is amplified in the second undulator section while interacting with the electron bunch. The technical difficulty in self-seeding is to assure a temporal overlap between the electron bunch and the seed pulse. This is because a delay for multi-GeV electron beams is typically limited up to a few hundreds of femtoseconds with a chicane of ~ 5 m length, whereas an optical delay is as large as several picoseconds with a conventional Si(111) double-crystal monochromator (DCM) that has a distance between the crystals of several millimeters. Amann et al. demonstrated self-seeding in the hard X-ray regime (Amann et al., 2012) at the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) (Emma et al., 2010) with a thin diamond (400) monochromator operating in the forward Bragg diffraction geometry. Here they used a monochromatic pulse echo as a seeding source that follows a prompt SASE-XFEL pulse with an interval of tens of femtoseconds (Geloni et al., 2010; Geloni et al., 2011; Lindberg & Shvyd’ko, 2012), and successfully generated a narrowband XFEL beam. With the ‘transmission’ monochromator, however, the prompt broadband SASE-XFEL pulse propagates through an optical axis being common to the seed pulse, which provides a broadband background in spectrum. Furthermore, a conversion efficiency, defined by the ratio of a peak power of a monochromatic seed pulse to that of an input XFEL pulse, of the transmission monochromator has been evaluated to be ~ 10–3, being much lower than that of a usual ‘reflection’ monochromator, which could degrade the electron bunch so as to generate an intense seeding source. In this paper we report development of a micro channel-cut monochromator (Bonse & Hart, 1965) as an essential optical component for achieving the reflection self-seeding with a high efficiency. We designed a channel-cut Si(111) crystal with a channel width of 90 µm, which gives an optical delay as small as ~ 100 fs while removing the prompt SASE beam. Since an X-ray beam is reflected twice at the two opposite blades of the channel-cut crystal made of a monolithic single crystal block, the optical axis of the exit beam is highly stabilized as compared with a DCM composed of independent

[PAGE 3] crystals (Diaz et al., 2010). After characterization of quality of the crystal at a SPring-8 beamline, we performed a feasibility test of the reflection self-seeding at SPring-8 Angstrom Compact free-electron LAser (SACLA) (Ishikawa et al., 2012). 2. Design of micro channel-cut crystal To achieve the reflection self-seeding with the micro channel-cut crystal, the following requirements should be satisfied: a small optical delay being less than the maximum delay for the electron bunch, and a large spatial acceptance to receive a major portion of an incident XFEL beam. The delay for the electron bunch Δte is approximately given by (Hara et al., 2013) Δte ~ θe 2 c L + 2 3 LB ⎛ ⎝⎜ ⎞ ⎠⎟, (1) where θe is the deflection angle of the electron beam, c the speed of light, L the drift distance between the first and second dipole magnets in the magnetic chicane, and LB the length of the magnetic field. The deflection angle can be written as θe ~ cBLB Ee , (2) where B is the magnetic flux density and Ee the electron beam energy. At SACLA we tune the photon energy of XFEL beams Eph by adjusting the electron beam energy Ee and/or the undulator deflection parameter K according to the following relationship: Eph = 2hc λu γ 2 1+ K 2 2 ≡ Aγ 2 1+ K 2 2 , (3) where h is the Plank’s constant, λu (= 18 mm) the undulator periodic length, and γ (= Ee/Ee0 with the rest energy of the electron Ee0) the Lorenz factor of the electron beam. The coefficient A (= 2hc/λu) is used to simplify the equation. Setting boundary conditions Ee ≤ Ee_max (γ ≤ γmax) and K ≤ Kmax, we have a reference photon energy E’ph = Aγmax 2/(1 + Kmax 2/2). For Eph ≤ E’ph, we usually adjust Ee to tune the photon energy Eph with a fixed K of Kmax, while we change K with fixing Ee = Ee_max for Eph ≥ E’ph. These conditions give the delay for the electron bunch Δte as Δte ~ C B2 Eph Eph ≤ ′ Eph ( ) DB2 Eph ≥ ′ Eph ( ) ⎧ ⎨ ⎪⎪ ⎩ ⎪ ⎪ (4)

[PAGE 4] with C = AcLB 2 L + 2 3 LB ⎛ ⎝⎜ ⎞ ⎠⎟ 1+ Kmax 2 2 ( )Ee0 2 D = cLB 2 L + 2 3 LB ⎛ ⎝⎜ ⎞ ⎠⎟ Ee_max 2 . (5) Equation (4) indicates that Δte is inversely proportional to Eph for Eph ≤ E’ph, whereas it is independent of Eph for Eph ≥ E’ph. On the other hand, the optical delay Δtph for a single channel-cut monochromator in the symmetric case is described by Δtph = hg dhklEph , (6) where g is the channel width of the crystal and dhkl the lattice spacing for the (hkl) diffraction. In order to introduce the maximum delay Δte_max to the electron bunch, we apply the maximum magnetic flux density Bmax to the dipole magnets in the chicane. The upper limit of the width gmax is defined that the optical delay with g = gmax is equal to Δte_max, which can be written as gmax = dhkl h Δte_maxEph ~ ′ C dhkl Eph ≤ ′ Eph ( ) ′ D dhklEph Eph ≥ ′ Eph ( ) ⎧ ⎨⎪ ⎩⎪ (7) with C’ = CBmax 2/h and D’ = DBmax 2/h. Note that gmax becomes a constant value C’dhkl for Eph ≤ E’ph, while it is proportional to Eph for Eph ≥ E’ph. By using a higher order diffraction with a smaller dhkl, the requirement on g becomes more severe, whereas the bandwidth of the seed and the seeded XFEL beam to be achieved could be narrower. The conversion efficiency of the monochromator using a high order diffraction is also reduced as compared with that for a low order diffraction because of the narrower acceptance in spectrum. Figure 1 shows Δte_max and the corresponding gmax as a function of Eph. Here we used the Si(111) diffraction (d111 = 3.136 Å) that is the lowest order diffraction in silicon to achieve a high conversion efficiency, and the latest parameters for the magnetic chicane at SACLA (L = 1.56 m, LB = 0.34 m, and Bmax = 0.52 T) with boundary conditions Ee_max = 7.8 GeV and Kmax = 2.15. The reference photon energy E’ph is calculated to be 9.69 keV. We concluded that the requirement on the optical delay is satisfied over a wide photon energy range by using a channel-cut Si(111) crystal with g < C’d111 = 204 µm. Note that a smaller electron-beam delay is preferred for suppressing unwanted coherent

[PAGE 5] synchrotron radiation and transporting an electron bunch with higher quality into the second undulator section. For the micro channel-cut crystal the spatial acceptance is considerably limited. The acceptance in the vertical direction is practically as small as half of g, while depending on Eph and quality of the crystal edge. In the horizontal direction the acceptance is determined by the depth of the diffracting blades, which is typically limited up to 10 × g because of the difficulty in fabrication of a narrow trench. A size of the XFEL beams at the middle of the magnetic chicane was evaluated to be ~ 50 µm in full-width at half maximum (FWHM) at 10 keV through a numerical simulation with an FEL simulation code SIMPLEX (Tanaka, 2015). Therefore, a spatial acceptance of > 50 µm in both the directions is needed. We designed a prototype micro channel-cut crystal, as shown in Fig. 2(a), which satisfies all of the above requirements near 10 keV. The channel width g was set to 90 µm, which gives an optical delay of 119 fs at 10 keV, as shown in Fig. 1. The overlap length of the two diffracting blades was designed to be 0.2 mm so as to obtain a spatial acceptance in the vertical direction of, at least, 50 µm while avoiding the use of an area near the crystal edge. The depth of the channel is ~ 0.6 mm being sufficiently larger than the horizontal beam size. The dimensions of the crystal are 10 × 10 × 10 mm3 to facilitate handling of the crystal while the right upper part is removed to place a beam stopper just downstream of the first blade, which is required to block the unwanted transmission beam propagating through the crystal. We note that a single channel-cut monochromator imposes a transverse shift of the beam axis Δh described by Δh = 2gcosθB , (8) where θB is the Bragg angle. The shift is less than 180 µm with the micro channel-cut crystal of g = 90 µm, which is acceptable for all the optical components at SACLA. Although the shift can be compensated by using a double channel-cut monochromator operating in the (+, –, –, +) geometry, the optical delay becomes twice as large as that in the single channel-cut monochromator. The micro channel-cut crystal was made of a floating-zone Si single crystal block. An ultra-narrow trench with 60–70 µm width and ~ 0.6 mm depth was formed with a dicing blade. Then the surface layer of 10–15 µm depth was removed through solution etching. Finally, the working area was moderately polished with fine slurry. Since the channel width of the crystal is one of the most important parameter and difficult to be measured with an optical microscope, we accurately characterized the channel width with an X-ray beam through Eq. (8), as described in the section 3.2.

[PAGE 6] The crystal was mounted on a dedicated holder (Fig. 2(b)) with a beam stopper made of tungsten of 250 µm thickness. The position of the crystal was finely adjusted by positioning screws so as to fit the incident surface to the bottom surface of the beam stopper, as shown in Fig. 2(c). 3. Characterization of micro channel-cut crystal 3-1. Experimental setup We characterized the micro channel-cut crystal through X-ray reflection topography and rocking curve measurements at the 1-km-long beamline BL29XU of SPring-8 (Tamasaku et al., 2001). A 10 keV X-ray beam emitted from an undulator was monochromatized by a SPring-8 standard Si(111) DCM (Yabashi et al., 1999). The size of the X-ray beam was reduced to 500 × 50 µm2 in the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) directions, respectively, with a 4-jaw slit located 987 m downstream of the source. The rocking curve was measured with two ion chambers, while the reflection topographs were taken with a high-resolution X-ray camera with a pixel size of 325 nm (Kameshima et al., 2018) placed at ~ 1 m downstream of the crystal. 3-2. Results Figure 3(a) shows a reflection profile under the Bragg condition. Both the incident and reflected beams were observed in a field of view of the camera (~ 665 × 665 µm2), simultaneously. A slightly curved reflection profile was observed, which was due to the variation of the channel width along the horizontal direction. The variation of Δh, however, was less than a few micrometers except near the crystal edge, which could provide a negligible variation of the optical delay. From Eqs. (6) and (8) with the shift Δh = 176 µm at 300 µm far from the edge, the channel width g and the corresponding optical delay Δtph at 10 keV were evaluated to be 90.0 µm and 119 fs, respectively, which well agrees with the design value. The spatial acceptance, defined by the maximum size of the reflected beam, was evaluated to be ~ 600 (H) × 100 (V) µm2 by using a larger X-ray beam. Figure 3(b) shows a rocking curve to be measured. The peak reflectivity reached 67% while the ideal reflectivity was calculated to be 81%. The reduction in reflectivity was associated with residual surface roughness and damage in the illumination area of the crystal. The imperfection of the crystal