[PAGE 1] Bessel beam fabrication of graphitic micro electrodes in diamond using laser bursts Akhil Kuriakosea,b, Francesco P. Mezzapesac, Caterina Gaudiusoc, Andrea Chiappinid, Federico Picolloe, Antonio Anconac and Ottavia Jedrkiewicza a. Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN)-CNR, Udr di Como, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy; akuriakose@studenti.uninsubria.it, ottavia.jedrkiewicz@ifn.cnr.it b. Dipartimento di Scienza e Alta Tecnologia, Università dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy; c. Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN)-CNR, Dipartimento Interateneo di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Bari, Via Amendola 173, 70125 Bari, Italy; francesco.mezzapesa@ifn.cnr.it; caterina.gaudiuso@ifn.cnr.it; antonio.ancona@uniba.it d. Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN)-CNR, CSMFO Lab and FBK Photonics Unit, Via alla Cascata 56/c, Povo, 38123 Trento, Italy; andrea.chiappini@ifn.cnr.it e. Department of Physics and “NIS” Inter-departmental Centre, University of Torino National Institute of Nuclear Physics, sect. Torino, Via Pietro Giuria 1, 10125, Torino, Italy; Correspondence: ottavia.jedrkiewicz@ifn.cnr.it Abstract We present the fabrication of conductive graphitic microelectrodes in diamond by using pulsed Bessel beams in the burst mode laser writing regime. The graphitic wires are created in the bulk of a 500 μm thick monocrystalline HPHT diamond (with (100) orientation) perpendicular to the sample surface, without beam scanning or sample translation. In particular, the role of different burst features in the resistivity of such electrodes is investigated for two very different sub-pulse durations namely 200 fs and 10 ps, together with the role of thermal annealing. Micro-Raman spectroscopy is implemented to investigate the laser-induced crystalline modification, and the results obtained by using two different laser repetition rates, namely 20 Hz and 200 kHz, are compared. A comparison of the micro-Raman spectra and of the resistivity of the electrodes fabricated respectively with 10 ps single pulses and with bursts (of sub-pulses) of similar total duration has also been made, and we show that the burst mode writing regime allows to fabricate more conductive micro electrodes, thanks to the heat accumulation process leading to stronger graphitization. Moreover, the microfabrication of diamond by means of the longest available bursts (~ 46.7 ps duration) featured by 32 sub-pulses of 200 fs

[PAGE 2] duration, with intra-burst time delay of 1.5 ps (sub-THz bursts), leads to graphitic wires with the lowest resistivity values obtained in this work, especially at low repetition rate such as 20 Hz. Indeed, micro electrodes with resistivity on the order of 0.01 Ω cm can be fabricated by Bessel beams in the burst mode regime even when the bursts are constituted by femtosecond laser sub-pulses, in contrast with the results of the standard writing regime with single fs pulses typically leading to less conductive micro electrodes. Keywords: Laser micromachining, femtosecond sub-pulses bursts, Bessel beams, diamond, graphitic electrodes. 1. Introduction Fabrication of microstructures in diamond for various novel applications such as radiation detectors [1], microfluidic chips [2] and photonic circuits [3] is attracting a lot of attention thanks to the unique properties of this crystal such as high scratch resistance, remarkable hardness with a Mohs index of 10, increased chemical resistivity, high radiation stability and high thermal conductivity [4, 5]. Thanks to its good biocompatibility, diamond is used as a strong candidate for biosensing as well [6]. One of the high impact works that is being investigated widely is the incorporation of Nitrogen Vacancy (NV) centres in the diamond bulk for quantum communication and nanoscale magnetometry [2]. A common feature in all these applications is the presence of graphitic electrodes which act as conductive pathways for different kinds of sensors. The main techniques to fabricate such conductive channels are annealing [7] where the electrodes are fabricated mainly on the surface of the diamond substrate, focused ion beam [8, 9] which specialises in fabrication within the bulk but close to the surface depending on the energy of the ion beam, and laser writing [10-14] which gives freedom to write in any geometry at any depth with desired length. Therefore, laser writing can also be used for designing and fabricating 3D structures as well within the diamond bulk. The precise modification of different transparent materials within a confined volume is possible thanks to the use of ultrafast pulsed lasers. The non-linear absorption processes of intense ultrashort pulses in the material reduce the collateral damages due to thermal effects thus helping in pin-pointing the modification without destroying the whole sample [15]. It is thus possible to write different microstructures in any configurations with any dimensions both on the surface and in the bulk making use of such lasers. As for diamond which is insulating in nature, a conventional focused Gaussian beam with sufficient fluence can be used for the optical breakdown of the material thus transforming locally the diamond into graphite. The whole process includes the primary optical breakdown of the

[PAGE 3] material which results in the formation of discrete globules of graphite in the nearest vicinity of the laser focus and the propagation of a graphitization wave from those globules to the laser focus. By translating the beam (or the sample stage) throughout the sample, one can fabricate a wire-like graphitized region with a length of our choice where the diameter of the wire is close to the beam spot size [10,16]. While the fabrication using Gaussian beams requires the translation of stage or the beam scanning for the creation of long straight electrodes, with the use of Bessel beams such movements are not needed. Finite energy Bessel beams (i.e., Bessel–Gauss beams) are characterised by a cylindrical symmetry and a transverse profile featured by an intense central spot surrounded by weaker concentric rings [17]. Their non-diffracting zone, invulnerable to the diffraction spreading in contrast to Gaussian beams [18], has been utilised for in-bulk high aspect-ratio modifications of transparent materials without the need for sample translation [19], even in single shot [20]. It is worth noting that Bessel beams find their applications not just in internal microstructuring of transparent materials but also for other technological applications such as drilling, cutting or welding thanks to their self-reconstruction property and the elongated focal zone [21-24]. The Bessel fabrication of graphitic electrodes perpendicular to the diamond sample surface has already been presented in recent works by our group. While a first study has led on one hand to a top- notch resistivity value of 0.04 Ω cm in (100) oriented samples [25], the exploration of the role of the crystallographic orientation of the diamond in the electrodes conductivity has shown that those fabricated in a (110) cut sample are more conductive compared to those fabricated in the former one, thanks to the additional heating mechanism associated with electrode growth in the (110) orientation case. This resulted in better transformation of sp3 diamond into sp2 structures, bringing down the electrodes resistivity value to 0.013 Ω cm [26]. Even though the use of ultrafast lasers helps in reducing the collateral damages in the material due to thermal effects, heat dissipation occurring in some laser machining regimes can lead to a reduction in the high quality and efficiency of the fabrication. In particular, the laser energy deposited onto the sample in the form of heat while using the standard single-pulse mode laser operation (i.e train of single pulses) can still lead to a few undesired damages such as cracks or melting, which can, in turn, worsen the quality of the microstructures, as also observed when creating micro holes [27]. More importantly, it also causes the diffusion of heat from the laser focal zone thus reducing the effective modification in the intended region. This energy dissipation can also lead to a rapid heating and cooling cycle, again producing potentially detrimental effects such as micro cracks [28]. In order to counter such outcomes, one of the most prominent approaches is to deliver laser pulses in bursts (for the pioneering work on bursts see [29]) where residual thermal energy does not have sufficient time to diffuse out of the laser interaction zone before the arrival of the next laser pulse [30]. The burst

[PAGE 4] mode processing consists of using sequences (or bursts) of several ultrashort laser pulses with inter- pulse time delay shorter than 1 μs. This helps in stopping the heat from seeping out by setting up a thermal modification zone within the focus of the beam itself thus helping in an efficient modification. Heat accumulation effects over such burst trains have already been found beneficial in various applications such as fabrication of deep high-aspect ratio holes in metals [31] and dielectrics [32] and of hierarchical structures conferring superhydrophobic wetting response to copper [33]. In the processing of materials by laser bursts, a single pulse (i.e. each pulse exiting from the laser source at the nominal repetition rate) is replaced by a pulse package including several sub-pulses with equally fractioned energy at an intra-burst frequency much higher than the laser repetition rate that is typically in the KHz to the MHz regime. The time delay between sub-pulses within the bursts can be as short as a few picoseconds, meaning that the intra-burst frequency is in the sub-TH regime. The advantage of using such laser bursts is that the target material can undergo efficient modification before the residual heat deposited by previous pulses diffuses away from the processing region thus increasing the effectual transformation which can be either a structural or phase modification. The burst laser systems are generally used for material processing especially in metals [34]. For instance, Karmer et al. [35] showed that by using burst modes one can benefit from increased material removal rate if the peak fluence of each pulse within the burst is nearer the optimum value needed for the maximum specific removal rate. Gaudiuso et al. [36] have reported that the main factors affecting the ablation process are the average power, the scan speed and the number of pulses within the burst. Even though the advantage of using bursts of pulses was not that evident in terms of ablation removal rate, the burst mode allowed a fine tuning of the surface finishing in micro-milling of steel. In other words, when shallow milling depths are needed, using bursts with high number of pulses is the most reliable solution to ensure high quality of the surface finishing, i.e. reduced surface roughness. Here, in this work, we try to take advantage of the heat stack up nature of bursts to initiate better transformation of diamond into amorphous carbon thus improving the conductivity of electrodes fabricated by Bessel beams in a (100)-cut sample. The aim of the work is to establish the importance of the additional heating mechanism occurring in a burst writing regime for the laser fabrication of highly conductive electrodes. Different burst configurations will be explored to understand the correlation between conductivity and burst parameters. A direct comparison between single pulse mode and burst mode writing regimes will be established by reporting the resistivity values of electrodes fabricated with same laser parameters. In addition, this work also highlights the role of the repetition rate in the resistivity of the laser-written graphitic wires. Using the best combination of burst configuration and laser writing parameters, we aim to improve the resistivity values previously obtained for electrodes fabricated in diamond with (110) orientation [26].

[PAGE 5] 2. Materials and Methods 2.1 Samples details To carry out an extensive study of the micromachining of diamond using various laser bursts configurations, two samples of monocrystalline type IIa HPHT diamond (obtained with High Pressure High Temperature synthesis thecnique) with (100) orientation are considered. While one sample is completely dedicated to the electrodes fabricated with bursts, the second one is used for single pulse fabrication so that a thorough comparison can be done. Both samples were provided by MB Optics. The sample dimensions are 5 mm × 5 mm × 0.5 mm. All the surfaces including the side-edges are polished so that the lateral analysis of the electrodes through optical microscopy is made possible. 2.2 Experimental set-up The laser source used in this experiment is the Ytterbium laser Pharos-SP from Light Conversion Ltd. delivering a linearly polarized beam at a wavelength of 1030 nm and a tunable pulse duration from 200 fs to 10 ps. The maximum available average power and pulse energy are given by 6 W and 1.5 mJ respectively, and the repetition rate can be tuned between 1 kHz and 1 MHz. In addition, a pulse picker allows selecting the number of pulses exiting from the laser source in order to reduce the repetition rate down to 20 Hz, for a comparison with previous results obtained at this pulse frequency [25,26]. The Bessel beam is obtained by sending a spatially filtered Gaussian beam with a ~ 4 mm total diameter through a fused silica axicon with 178o apex angle. A telescopic system formed by a 229 mm focal length lens (L1) and a 0.45 N.A. 20× microscope objective (fobj = 10 mm), leads to a demagnified Bessel beam featured by 12o cone angle, a total central core size of about 2 µm and a total Bessel zone of about 600 µm at the sample position, characterized prior to micromachining with a one lens imaging system and a CMOS camera (Gentec BEAMAGE-4M); for details on the typical intensity distribution see for instance [37]. The energy is set and varied using an energy controller consisting of a half wave plate and a polarizer, and was chosen in a such a way to work, for each writing mode, in the optimal range leading to micro electrodes with lowest resistivity. The Bessel beam is injected orthogonally to the sample as illustrated in the experimental set up schemes reported in [25,26], and thanks to its elongated focal zone covering the entire 500 m thickness of the diamond, the fabrications are carried out without any sample translation. A real-time observation of the sample surfaces during the micromachining process is realized thanks to a backlighting Light Emitting Diode (LED) placed below the transparent sample and an imaging system using a lens and another CCD.

[PAGE 6] This allows a careful adjustment of the relative positioning of the Bessel zone with respect to the sample thickness. By verifying that the top and bottom surface damage traces obtained in single shot are of similar shape and size, we can ensure for the case of in-bulk microfabrication that the central core peak intensity along the Bessel zone is symmetrically distributed across the sample, i.e., maximum intensity in the middle of the sample, and smaller intensity at the top and bottom. This also prevents strong input interaction at the air/diamond interface where beam reshaping occurs because of the sudden change in the refractive index. In order to generate the internal graphitic wires covering the whole sample thickness, the micro fabrications are carried out in the multiple shot regime, as the length of the obtained micro electrode depends on the number of laser pulses irradiating the diamond. In the single pulse writing regime with 200 fs pulses (where the growth turned out to be slower) it was found that a minimum of 7000 Bessel pulses is enough to create an electrode of 500 μm length, provided that the Bessel thickness zone covers the entire diamond [25]. All the experiments performed in this work have been carried out with 9000 laser pulses or bursts. Finally note that the threshold fluence of our Bessel core for having surface damages in single shot is in the range of 1-2 J/cm2 (the lower value in the ps laser pulsed regime) while for the internal graphitic wire growth in multiple shot a double fluence is typically needed. For the implementation of the burst mode system, following pioneering works that demonstrated the possibility to temporally shape ultrashort pulses with nonlinear crystals [38; 39], the beam line has been modified by adding five birefringent calcite crystals at the laser output [33, 36]. In this experimental configuration, before the Bessel beam shaping, each incoming laser pulse is split into 2 sub-pulses by each crystal, for a total number of up to n=25 sub-pulses within the bursts, depending on the mutual orientation of the pulses polarization and the optical axes of the calcite crystals. The intra-burst frequency (in sub-THz regime in our case) also depends both on the crystal orientation and thickness. The pulses within the burst (i.e., the sub-pulses) have alternate crossed polarizations, half of them along the optical axes of the crystals. Bursts with different number of sub-pulses (n = 2, 8 and 32) ar used in our fabrication experiments and their time delay Δt is varied between 1.5 ps and 46.5 ps, while working with pulse durations of 200 fs. When employing 10 ps pulse widths, we use bursts with n=2 sub-pulses having a time delay Δt=36 ps or Δt =46.5 ps. While the details of all burst configurations used in this work are presented in Table 1, a schematic of one of those (for instance mode 3) is shown for illustration in Figure 1. It is worth noting that the temporal duration of all the available bursts lies in the picosecond range, while the laser sub-pulses within the burst packages can have a duration of 200 fs or 10 ps.