[PAGE 1] Effect of Crystallographic Orientation on the Potential Barrier and Conductivity of Bessel Written Graphitic Electrodes in Diamond Akhil Kuriakosea,b, Andrea Chiappinic, Pietro Apràd, and Ottavia Jedrkiewicza a. Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN)-CNR, Udr di Como, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy; akuriakose@studenti.uninsubria.it, ottavia.jedrkiewicz@ifn.cnr.it b. Dipartimento di Scienza e Alta Tecnologia, Università dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy; c. Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN)-CNR, CSMFO and FBK Photonics Unit, Trento, Italy; andrea.chiappini@ifn.cnr.it d. Department of Physics and “NIS” Inter-departmental Centre, University of Torino National Institute of Nuclear Physics, sect. Torino, Via Pietro Giuria 1, 10125, Torino, Italy; Correspondence: ottavia.jedrkiewicz@ifn.cnr.it Abstract Ultrafast laser micromachining can be used to promote diamond graphitisation, enabling the creation of electrically conductive wires embedded in the diamond matrix. In this context, the presence of a potential barrier in the conductivity of transverse graphitic wires fabricated by pulsed Bessel beams without sample translation across 500 μm thick monocrystalline CVD diamond has been studied. In particular, the role of the crystallographic orientation has been analysed. The morphology and the conductivity of the obtained electrodes have been studied using optical microscopy and current- voltage measurements, while the structural changes have been investigated by means of micro-Raman spectroscopy. By using different laser writing parameters, we have explored the features of different electrodes in a (100) and a (110) oriented diamond crystal respectively. We show that in addition to the use of specific pulse energies and durations (in the fs and ps regimes), the crystallographic orientation of the sample plays an important role in reducing or eliminating the potential barrier height of the IV electrical characterization curves. In a (110) oriented sample, it is possible to eradicate the potential barrier completely even for graphitic wires fabricated at low pulse energy and in the fs pulse duration regime, in contrast to the (100) oriented-crystal case where the barrier is generally observed.

[PAGE 2] The effect of thermal annealing of the diamond samples on the resistivity of the fabricated micro- electrodes has also been investigated. In (110) oriented diamond, resistivities lower than 0.015  cm have been obtained. Keywords: Laser micromachining, Bessel beams, diamond, crystallographic orientation, graphitic electrodes, potential barrier 1. Introduction Diamond is an excellent material platform thanks to its unique properties such as high thermal conductivity, good biocompatibility, high radiation stability, remarkable hardness and high chemical resistivity [1, 2]. Moreover, the presence of NV centres in diamond has attracted a lot of attention due to their potential applications in quantum communication and sensing at nanoscale regime [3]. Another prominent feature of diamond is that it can be converted to graphite-like carbon thus creating conductive channels within a sample that is insulating in nature [4]. Such electrodes, which are used as electric field generators, find numerous applications in photonic chips [5], radiation detectors [6], microfluidic sensing systems [3] and biosensing [7]. There are many techniques for conductive electrode fabrication in diamond such as thermal annealing, ion beam lithography and laser writing. Annealing the diamond sample under vacuum around 1700o C can lead to the formation of a graphitic layer on the surface resulting in the generation of a conductive region independent of surrounding gas pressure [8]. Ion beam lithography operates by irradiating diamond with ion beams at keV or MeV energy levels, promoting the creation of lattice defects. These defects enable the transformation of the damaged region into graphite if a critical threshold (graphitization threshold) [9-10] is exceeded. Fabrication of microstructures in different transparent materials using ultrafast lasers has emerged as an excellent tool for the precise modification of the same. Thanks to the multiphoton absorption and avalanche ionization, the non-linear absorption of the ultrashort pulses helps in avoiding collateral damages due to thermal effects thus resulting in a modification of the material within a confined volume [11]. This spatial confinement, together with laser-beam scanning or sample translation, makes it possible to fabricate different microstructures in three dimensions within the bulk of the material. In diamond, a conventional Gaussian beam can be used for the optical breakdown of the material due to the local transformation of diamond into graphite at the focused beam waist. As a result, a conducting graphitized region is formed in the insulator and a uniform translation of the laser focus throughout the crystal induces the formation of a wire-like graphitized region with a length of

[PAGE 3] our choice [12]. The optical breakdown generates one or more initial graphitic seeds inside diamond and the modified region continues as an extension toward the laser beam as a graphitization wave thanks to the good absorption of radiation by graphite. Taking advantage of this graphitization wave, it is possible to create conductive microstructures within the diamond bulk in any orientation [13]. Recently, finite energy Bessel beams [14] (i.e., Bessel–Gauss beams) which are characterised by a cylindrical symmetry and a transverse profile featured by an intense central spot surrounded by weaker concentric rings resulting in an elongated non-diffracting zone have been utilised for in-bulk modification of transparent materials. Thanks to this elongated focal length (also known as Bessel Zone) where the central beam core is resistant to diffraction spreading, sample translation along the beam propagation direction for in-depth microstructuring is not required in contrast to the standard laser processing techniques using focused Gaussian pulses [15-16]. Due to their self-reconstruction property and their elongated focal zone, finite energy Bessel beams are ideal not only for internal microstructuring but also for high-impact technological applications such as high-speed cutting, welding or drilling of transparent materials [17-20]. Fabrication of graphitic microwires in diamond bulk using pulsed Bessel beams was initially reported by Canfield et al. [21], and a detailed study of the resulting micro-electrodes as a function of the laser writing parameters was recently presented by our group in [22], where resistivity values on the order of 0.04  cm were obtained thanks to an optimization of the Bessel pulse energy and duration. In there, the presence of a potential barrier in the electrical measurements related to the graphitic wires generated in the femtosecond regime was shown but not addressed in a detailed manner. The potential barrier refers to the voltage gap only after which the electrode shows a perfectly ohmic behaviour. Its presence affects the quality of the electrode and to have good conductivity values, it is of utmost importance to avoid such barriers. The presence of a potential barrier in laser written graphitic wires fabricated with Gaussian beams has been addressed in [23] for a (100) oriented diamond, as a function of different laser writing parameters. In contrast, here, in this work, where the graphitic electrodes are fabricated without sample translation nor beam aberration correction techniques, using the advantage of an elongated focus of the Bessel beam injected orthogonally to the top surface of the samples, we show that in addition to the use of specific pulse energies and durations (both in the fs and ps regimes), the crystallographic orientation of the sample (i.e. having a (100) or (110) top surface plane) plays an important role in reducing or eliminating during the IV electrical characterization measurements, the potential barrier. The latter turns out in fact to be linked to the resulting resistivity of the electrodes as well. We also investigate the effect of thermal annealing of the diamond samples not only on the potential barrier but especially on the resistivity of the fabricated micro-wires. We shall see that the electrodes fabricated in a sample with (110) orientation do not exhibit any kind of barrier irrespective

[PAGE 4] of the pulse energy and pulse duration used during the laser fabrication. Moreover, electrodes fabricated in the picosecond regime show no trace of barrier throughout a wide range of pulse energy values. Furthermore, the correlation between potential barrier and conductivity variation with respect to various laser writing parameters is also discussed in detail, and we report some of the lowest resistivity values that, compared to the literature, can be achieved with laser micromachining techniques. 2. Materials and Methods 2.1 Micromachining set-up and samples The fabrication of conductive micro-electrodes perpendicular to the diamond surface was performed by means of a 20-Hz Ti:Sapphire amplified laser system (Amplitude) which delivers 40-fs transform- limited pulses at 790 nm wavelength in the mJ pulse energy range. Thanks to the laser compressor which can be detuned to change the pulse duration, it is possible to work at both femtosecond and picosecond regimes. This is crucial since pulse duration can influence the barrier height in the conductivity of an electrode as shown later in section 3.2. The results reported in this paper are related to a pulse duration of 200 fs and 10 ps respectively. As described in detail in [22], a 5 mm (full width at half maximum) Gaussian beam (with linear polarization) is converted into a Bessel beam (BB) after passing it through a fused silica axicon with a 178o apex angle. Thanks to a telescopic system formed by a 250 mm focal length lens (L1) and a 0.45 N.A. 20× microscope objective (fobj = 9 mm), the final beam at the sample position is featured by 12o cone angle, a central core size of about 2.7 µm and a total Bessel zone of 700 µm. As shown in Fig.1, the Bessel beam, whose final non diffractive length is on the order of the diamond thickness, was sent orthogonally towards the sample placed on a micrometer precision 3D motorized stage (driven by SCA, system control application software, Altechna Rnd, Vilnius, Lithuania). The microfabrication of the graphitic wires was thus performed in a transverse configuration and without any sample translation. Note that in the micromachining experiments the pulse energy was varied in a range such that the BB central core is the only portion of the beam which undergoes nonlinear absorption and interacts with the diamond sample, leading to microstructures with transverse size in the micrometer range. For a precise adjustment of the energy, a motorized attenuator consisting of a polarizer and rotating halfwave plate (Watt Pilot, Altechna Rnd, Vilnius, Lithuania) was placed just after an optical shutter used to select the number of laser pulses.

[PAGE 5] Fig:1 a) Schematic representation of the Bessel beam formation by an axicon with the transverse intensity profile recorded by the CCD at the sample position, b) Micromachining set up for a transverse Bessel beam writing of the sample. As described in [22], a real-time observation of the sample surfaces (both top and bottom) was performed during the micromachining thanks to a backlighting Light Emitting Diode (LED) placed below the transparent sample and an imaging system using a lens and a CCD (not shown in the figure). This helps in setting up the relative positioning of the Bessel beam non-diffracting length with respect to the sample thickness, in order to have a symmetrical intensity distribution of the beam core across the sample to guarantee the formation of complete through-wires. As already discussed in [22], this also prevents strong and destructive interaction at the air/diamond interface where beam reshaping occurs because of the sudden change in the refractive index [24]. The diamond sample was placed on the motorized stage and aligned in both x and y axis (thanks to micrometer screws of the support) to make sure it is flat (within an error limit of 2 µm), in order to fabricate orthogonal wires with respect to the sample top and bottom surfaces. The Bessel beam micromachining was performed in multiple shot regime and, as already mentioned and shown in Fig. 1, the laser pulses were injected orthogonally to the sample surface. During the laser exposure the

[PAGE 6] graphitic electrode starts growing from the bottom surface towards the top. It has been found that around 600 pulses are required to grow an electrode of length 500 µm in 10 ps regime and a minimum of 7000 in case of 200 fs regime. We believe this disparity arises from the fact that because of the higher intensity for a given energy, of a fs pulse with respect to the ps one, the damage on the top surface of the sample which is larger, can act as a barrier and lead to distortions for the incoming beam, in addition to the fact that the formed graphite at the air material interface will absorb part of the light. Nevertheless, due to its inherent conical energy reservoir for its formation, the Bessel beam gets recreated after a small distance depending on the size of the damage [25]. The fact that the BB undergoes an interruption could be the reason for which, in the fs regime, it takes more pulses for the graphitic wire to fully grow from bottom to the top of the sample. We mention that the growth rate of graphitic electrodes within the diamond bulk will be addressed in a future work. All the electrodes reported in this work have been created by sending 9000 Bessel pulses on the sample in both fs and ps laser machining regimes. Here, we have explored the role of different laser writing parameters and of the crystallographic orientation on the potential barrier and thus on the conductivity of the graphitic wires fabricated. For this purpose, two samples were considered – a monocrystalline type IIa CVD diamond with (100) orientation and another sample of the same type with a (110) orientation, both produced by MB Optics. The dimensions of the samples are 5 mm × 5 mm ×0.5 mm. 2.2 Current-voltage measurements The electrical characterisation of the fabricated electrodes (featured by voltage-current measurements) was carried out by using conductive layers on the top and bottom surfaces of the diamond samples [22]. In particular, on one surface a silver metal deposition was carried out covering the end of the graphitic electrode (one end of the graphitic wires). In order to isolate one electrode from the others in order to avoid a short circuit during the electrical measurements, a mask was created by milling aluminium film (15 µm of thickness) with a nanosecond-pulsed Nd:YAG laser emitting in the IR (1064 nm), VIS (532 nm) or UV (355 nm) [26]. The mask dimensions were 250 × 250 µm2 in area. Metal deposition for the fabrication of the electrodes was carried out using a thermal evaporator. The thickness of the deposition was 400 nm. The other side of the sample was fixed on a silicon wafer using silver paste thus completing the whole circuit (See [22] for details). The current-voltage characterization was then conducted with a 2-probe configuration (tungsten- carbide microprobes controllable with micrometric accuracy) in a custom probe station. The probes