[PAGE 1] 1 Soft x-rays induce femtosecond solid-to-solid phase transition F. Tavella (1), H. Höppner (2,3,4), V. Tkachenko (5), N. Medvedev (5,6,7) , F. Capotondi (8), T. Golz (2), Y. Kai (3,4) , M. Manfredda (8), E. Pedersoli (8), M.J. Prandolini (9), N. Stojanovic (2), T. Tanikawa (2), U. Teubner (3,4), S. Toleikis (2), and B. Ziaja (5,10) 1) SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA 2) Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, 22607 Hamburg, Germany 3) Institut für Laser und Optik, Hochschule Emden/Leer-University of Applied Sciences, 26723 Emden, Germany. 4) Institut für Physik, Carl von Ossietzky Universität, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany 5) Center for Free-Electron Laser Science, DESY, 22607 Hamburg, Germany 6) Institute of Physics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Prague 8, Czech Republic 7) Institute of Plasma Physics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Za Slovankou 3, 182 00 Prague 8, Czech Republic 8) Elettra-Sincrotrone Trieste, 34149 Basovizza, Trieste, Italy 9) Helmoltz-Institut Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany 10) Institute of Nuclear Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kraków 31-342, Poland Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to the following authors: F. Tavella (e-mail: tavella@slac.stanford.edu), S. Toleikis (e-mail: sven.toleikis@desy.de), V. Tkachenko (e-mail: victor.tkachenko@desy.de), or N. Medvedev (e-mail: nikita.medvedev@fzu.cz) Abstract Soft x-rays were applied to induce graphitization of diamond through a non-thermal solid-to- solid phase transition. This process was observed within poly-crystalline diamond with a time- resolved experiment using ultrashort soft x-ray pulses of duration 52.5 fs and cross correlated by an optical pulse of duration 32.8 fs. This scheme enabled for the first time the measurement of a phase transition on a timescale of ~150 fs. Excellent agreement between experiment and theoretical predictions was found, using a dedicated code that followed the non-equilibrium evolution of the irradiated diamond including all transient electronic and structural changes. These observations confirm that soft x-rays can induce a non-thermal ultrafast solid-to-solid phase transition on a hundred femtosecond timescale. Introduction Femtosecond irradiation of matter with a laser pulse can induce structural transition to a disordered state: amorphization, or defect creation [1–3]. Graphitization of diamond is a counterexample as it is an order-to-order (solid-to-solid) phase transition [4]. Energy delivered to the system by incoming photons leads to a change in the interatomic bonding from sp3 (diamond) to sp2 bonds (graphite). Previous studies showed that graphitization can be achieved with pulses in the regime from optical to hard x-ray energies. Decisive is the average radiation energy absorbed per atom. A dose of ~0.7 eV/atom is needed to graphitize diamond non- thermally [4]. This corresponds to 19.5 GJ/m3 or 5.5 MJ/kg ; a similar damage threshold in terms

[PAGE 2] 2 of the absorbed dose was calculated for optical irradiation of diamond in Ref. [5]. Due to the energy dependence on the photo-absorption cross-sections, achieving such dose per atom requires that the pulse fluence is adjusted to the incoming photon energy. There are still active debates over the nature of the observed transitions. Ref. [3] claims that for a class of materials, femtosecond optical pulses can trigger a specific process known as a non- thermal phase transition. Generally, for a non-thermal transition, theory predicts that the excitation of a few percent of the valence band electrons leads to a drastic modification of the potential energy surface triggering a displacement of the atoms. This occurs on a much faster time scale (sub-picosecond) than the transfer of the absorbed laser energy to the lattice via electron-phonon coupling (typically few ps) [6,7]. Therefore, such ultrafast transitions are called 'non-thermal', in contrast to the one triggered by atomic heating via electron-phonon coupling which is then referred to as 'thermal'. Contradictory claims can be found in, e.g., Ref. [8]. In addition to these fundamental aspects, understanding the graphitization process is important for diamond-based technologies, since diamond is increasingly used for practical applications in different forms: bulk, thin films [9] or nano-objects [10]. The question of diamond stability and, correspondingly, graphitization, upon high pressure [11,12], annealing [13,14], or irradiation by optical lasers [15,16] have been investigated both experimentally and theoretically. Recent advent of free-electron lasers (FELs) in the VUV/soft x-ray and hard x-ray regime allows the investigation of a phase transition of diamond on an ultra-short femtosecond timescale. In case of soft x-rays at low pulse fluences the excitation of electrons is only due to single photo- absorption. Photo-absorption of x-rays promotes electrons to highly excited states, which then relax through collisional scattering, producing secondary electrons. This leads to fast electron thermalization during the femtosecond FEL pulse, or shortly after [17]. Because the x-ray cross- section for free carrier absorption is considerably small, there is no direct heating of the free electrons by the x-ray pulses, in contrast to optical pulse irradiation [3]. Therefore x-ray electron excitation, which is driving non-thermal processes, enables an accurate control of the absorbed dose in the material. Graphitization process of a chemical vapor deposited diamond has been reported in [4] after the irradiation with a VUV/soft x-ray FEL pulse and graphitization was confirmed by post mortem measurements of the irradiated sample area. Photo-absorption cross-section was used to convert the threshold fluence to an average energy absorbed per atom. In work reported in Ref. [4], an average absorbed dose of about 0.7 eV per atom triggers the graphitization process. This threshold value of absorbed energy per atom has been found to be independent of the incoming FEL pulse photon energy in the range between 24 eV and 285 eV. Good agreement of the predicted graphitization threshold with the dedicated theoretical model developed in Refs. [4,18,19] indicated that the observed transition may indeed be non-thermal. However, this experiment did not give any direct evidence on the transition timescale. Here we report on the experiment in which for the first time soft x-ray induced graphitization of diamond is followed in a time-resolved manner. The experiment was performed at the FERMI free-electron laser facility [20]. A soft x-ray pulse of sufficiently high fluence initiated a structural transition in diamond. The graphitization process was probed by an ultrashort optical pulse. The results from the time-resolved measurement of optical transmittance were compared with the predictions from the theoretical model. They were found to be in a very good agreement, identifying all transition stages anticipated by the model. In particular, the rapid drop of transmission, which is the main signature of graphitization, is clearly visible. It occurs on the

[PAGE 3] 3 predicted timescale of ~150 fs. This time-resolved experimental verification confirms the occurrence of a direct solid-to-solid phase transition induced by a non-thermal modification of the potential energy surface. For different FEL pulse fluences above threshold, the characteristic transmission drop occurs on the same timescale indicating that the same structural transition occurs in all cases. These observations unambiguously confirm that soft x-rays can induce non- thermal direct solid-to-solid phase transition on femtosecond timescale. Time-resolved measurement of ultrafast graphitization in diamond The method used to observe ultrafast graphitization of diamond is based on solid-state target EUV/optical cross-correlation [22-25]. With this approach, a 47.4 eV FEL pulse is used to induce the transition from diamond to graphite. The experimental setup shown in Fig. 1 is similar to the one used in Ref. [26]. The wavefront of the FEL is tilted with respect to the target; thus the integrated FEL fluence is encoded spatially and temporally onto the surface of the target. The subsequent temporal evolution of the graphitization process is monitored by a probe laser with a wavefront parallel to the target. The experiment was carried out at the DiProI beamline [27] at the FERMI free-electron laser. Details on the experimental setup and beam parameters are available in the Supplementary Materials. Figure 1. Schematic of the experimental setup. The FEL beam propagates at an angle  with respect to the sample surface. Within a single shot, different fractions of the XUV wavefront are absorbed at different spatial positions on the sample, providing a spatio-temporal encoding (Single-Shot Time Axis). A collimated optical pulse under normal incidence is used to probe the optical transmission change. The spatio-temporal encoded signal has a limited time window, which requires additional scanning of the delay between FEL pulses and optical probe pulse. Experimental results In this experiment, we used a 300 µm thick poly-crystalline CVD diamond substrate which was polished to a surface roughness of less than 20 nm. We performed two specific types of measurements. The first measurement was performed below the graphitization threshold to: (1) measure the FEL pulse duration, (2) define the time overlap between the FEL pulse and the optical probe pulse on the diamond target and (3) measure the threshold for damage (graphitization). The second measurement was performed above the graphitization threshold to investigate the underlying dynamics. Below the graphitization threshold: The FEL focal spot was set to ~6.2x128.1 µm2 (radius at 1/e2) to work with lower fluence and a large single-shot time window. The longer spatial dimension corresponds to the time axis. The transient optical cross-correlation provides information on the relative delay between FEL and optical probe pulse. Similar setups are used at FEL facilities to measure the time arrival jitter between FEL and optical probe pulse [23-25].

[PAGE 4] 4 The characteristic transmission curve of the EUV/optical cross-correlation measured on diamond is displayed in Fig. 2 (blue line). The measured transient transmission curve is compared to XTANT simulation (solid black line). The time arrival position is marked by the Gaussian pulse (magenta line). The transmission measurement and the simulation are in good agreement, except for the fast relaxation of the signal on a sub-picosecond time scale which we attribute to carrier diffusion (dashed black line). The discrepancy arises as due to the necessary condition of quasi-neutrality within a system with periodic boundary conditions. As simulated in XTANT, only an approximate diffusion model could be applied. A simpler code from Reference [26] is used to model the pulse duration and the fast signal relaxation. The FEL pulse duration retrieved from single-shot measurements is (52.5±3.4) fs (measurements not shown). These measurements were performed on a Si3N4 membrane due to its pristine surface quality, which improves the signal-to-noise ratio, using methods described in Ref. [26]. The measurement on diamond shown in Fig. 2a is averaged over 400 measurements. The diffusion of free electron density ne results in a decrease of carrier density as a function time. The lifetime is estimated to be ~185 fs assuming an exponential decay parameter for ne. Figure 2. Below damage threshold ionization of diamond: a) Transient optical cross-correlation measurement (blue line with error bars) compared to XTANT simulation (black line, solid and dashed, see text). Position of FEL pulse (dashed magenta line). b) Damage threshold measurement: transmission change of optical probe laser versus fluence after 2500 consecutive FEL shots on a diamond sample. The measurement shown in Fig. 2a was performed below the damage threshold of diamond. The FEL pulse energy on target was (2.29±0.15) µJ. The FEL pulse energy was varied using a gas attenuator. We observed onset of damage on diamond at fluence values >0.1 J/cm2 (see Fig. 2b). The peak fluence for this measurement is ~0.17 J/cm2, which leads to visible damage after sample irradiation with ~100 shots. The measured damage (graphitization) fluence agree with values reported in Ref. [28] which estimates the damage threshold for CVD diamond at 0.14 J/cm2 at 38.1 eV and Ref. [29] with the threshold for graphitization at ~0.1 J/cm2 at 50 eV. Above graphitization threshold: Graphitization was performed with a smaller focal spot of ~12.3x17.3 µm2 (radius at 1/e2) to induce visible graphitization process and to access higher fluences. The smaller focal spot size decreased the single-shot time window. The effect was therefore characterized using single shot data combined with time scans to increase the time window. The FEL pulse energy was (41.67±1.57) µJ, with peak fluence in the focal spot of ~12- 18 J/cm2 (see Supplementary Materials). We had access to the entire range of fluences due to the

[PAGE 5] 5 spatially encoded measurement (see Supplementary Materials). Data analysis was performed using a sorting method described in the Supplementary Materials. Each measurement was performed on an undamaged position of the diamond sample. The transmitted probe pulse signal was recorded at a particular time delay with respect to the irradiation with an FEL pulse. In addition, the transmitted probe pulse signal of the post-mortem shot from the previous measurement is recorded on the same CCD image (see Supplementary Materials). Post-mortem analysis of the irradiated sample shows a presence of a graphitized layer on the surface of the irradiated poly-crystalline diamond substrate. From measurements presented in the Supplementary Materials, we conclude that the graphitized layer in the central irradiated region is dominated by nano-crystalline graphite (nc-C) with additional low sp3 amorphous carbon (a-C). Figure 3. Transmission measurement of ultrafast graphitization: The transient optical transmission signal at a wavelength of 630 nm is shown from a diamond sample irradiated with soft x-rays: experimental (open black squares with errorbars) and theoretical with an average dose of 0.8 eV/atom (red line). FEL photon energy was 47.4 eV, pulse duration was 52.5 fs (FWHM, magenta line). Intervals (i)-(iii) denote different stages of graphitization. The predicted thickness of the transient graphitized layer at the time instance of 400 fs is 38 nm. Comparison between the experimentally measured transmittance of the optical probe pulse (wavelength of 630 nm) with theoretical predictions is shown in Fig. 3. The transmission curve was normalized to the initial transmission of non-irradiated diamond. It exhibits a few characteristic features which reflect three different stages of graphitization: initial electronic excitation, band gap collapse and atomic relocation described in more detail in the following theory section. Simulation of ultrafast graphitization of diamond We model free-electron laser irradiation of diamond with the in-house simulation tool, XTANT [6,18,19]. It follows the evolution of irradiated diamond through all non-equilibrium stages starting from its x-ray irradiation up to the completion of the graphitization process. Transient information on electronic and atomic structure is obtained from the model. Photo-absorption and non-equilibrium electron kinetics are modeled within a Monte Carlo scheme; low-energy electrons and their coupling to atoms (phonons) are included by means of the Boltzmann collision integral; atomic structure is traced by a molecular dynamics technique, whereas the electronic band structure and the collective atomic potential energy surface for atoms are obtained at each time-step from a transferable tight binding Hamiltonian [21].

[PAGE 6] 6 Since diamond and graphite have different optical properties, the solid-to-solid phase transition can be monitored by tracing optical parameters such as reflectivity or transmittance. Knowledge of the transient electron distribution, band structure and oscillator strength coefficients (both obtained from the evolving Hamiltonian), fully defines the transient complex dielectric function within the random-phase approximation, from which transient optical coefficients of the materials are derived without any adjustable parameter [30]. In the model, electronic distribution forms the attractive part of the interatomic potential. The bonding between atoms starts to undergo modifications when a sufficient number of electrons is excited. This can lead to an ultrafast non-thermal phase transition. In case of diamond, our model predicts that if an average dose of above 0.7 eV per atom in diamond is absorbed, it leads to the excitation of over 1.5% of electrons from the bonding states of the valence to the antibonding states of the conduction band. Accounting for a wide band gap in diamond (~6 eV), the excitation of 1.5% of electrons produces sufficiently large changes of the potential energy [31]. This, in turn, triggers non-thermal graphitization [4,19]. For more details, see Supplementary Materials. XTANT predicts that non-thermal graphitization of diamond proceeds in a few steps: first, the electrons emitted after FEL photoabsorption excite a sufficient number of electrons into the conduction band via collisional processes. For photon energies around 50 eV, it can already occur during a femtosecond pulse [17]. Second, the high number of electrons excited to antibonding states weakens interatomic bonds, which leads to a band gap collapse [4]. This occurs within ~50 fs after the pulse maximum. Third, the band gap collapse promotes even more electrons into the conduction band, weakening the interatomic potential within the diamond lattice. Interatomic bonds are then breaking and forming sp2 bonds instead of sp3. Finally, diamond graphitization completes within the next 50-100 fs. Due to the small mass of carbon atoms and the short distance needed for their relocation to the new equilibrium positions within the forming highly-overdense graphite planes, the entire non-thermal phase transition completes within ~150 fs after the pulse peak. Simulation results: stages of graphitization Non-thermal graphitization of diamond proceeds in following steps (see Fig. 3): (i) Initial electronic excitation occurs during the FEL pulse. In case of VUV or soft x- ray pulses, photoelectrons relax to the bottom of the conduction band within a few femtoseconds via collisional processes and the resulting electron cascade [17,18]. A density of the electrons excited to the conduction band is shown in Fig. 4. The simulated increase of the transmission during the FEL pulse is due to the initial electronic excitation, altering the optical coefficients. For FEL photons of 47.4 eV energy with small penetration depth (~0.02 μm) and for relatively low density of excited electrons, our model predicts a rapid (small) decrease of the reflectivity, corresponding to an increase of transmission (cf. both coefficients plotted in Fig. 7 in Supplementary Materials). The experimental uncertainty in this regime does not allow for accurate comparison of the data with theoretical results. (ii) Electronic excitation triggers a band gap collapse (see Fig. 5). This occurs within ~50 fs after the pulse maximum of the FEL pulse at the time instant when the density of conduction band electrons overcomes the threshold value of ~1.5% [19,31]. The band gap collapse is reflected in the slight decrease of the transmission, followed by a short-lived plateau (up to ~ 80 fs). The short-lived