[PAGE 1] Multi-focal Picosecond laser vertical slicing of 6 inch 4H-SiC ingot Jiabao Dua,b,c,d, Shusen Zhaoa,b,c,d*, Xiaoyu Lua,b,c,d, Lu Jianga,b,c,d, Shifei Hane,f,g, Xinyao Lia,b,d, Xuechun Lina,b,c,d a Laboratory of All-solid-state Light Sources, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, China b Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China c College of Electronic, Electrical and communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China d Engineering Technology Research Center of All-Solid-State Lasers Advanced Manufacturing, Beijing 100083, China e State Key Laboratory of Precision Space-time Information Sensing Technology, Beijing, 100084, China f Key Laboratory of Photonic Control Technology (Tsinghua University), Ministry of Education, Beijing， 100084, China g Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing，100084, China * Corresponding author: E-mail address:. Postal address: Laboratory of All-solid-state Light Sources, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 35, Qinghua East Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100083, China. Keywords: Vertical Slicing, 4H-SiC, Ultrafast laser processing, hologram generation

[PAGE 2] Abstract: Ultrafast laser direct writing inside materials has garnered significant attention for its applications in techniques like two-photon polymerization, stealth dicing and vertical slicing. 4H-Silicon Carbide (4H-SiC) vertical slicing has wide potentials from research to industry due to low kerf loss and high slicing speed. In this paper, to improve the vertical slicing processing quality and lower the separation strength, we introduce a multi-focal vertical slicing method with spherical aberrations caused by refractive index eliminated. Additionally, by shaping the wavefront of picosecond laser, our experiments show the lower latitudinal ablation zone and higher crack propagation of multi-focal vertical slicing method on 4H-SiC, demonstrating that this method not only reduces filamentations to minimize ablation damage, but also significantly reduce the tensile strength during separation. We achieve a 6 inch 4H-SiC ingot vertical slicing and separation using 4-focal slicing. This method shows various potentials in laser processing. 1. Introduction Ultrafast laser processing, including picosecond laser and femtosecond laser processing, has become an essential technique for precision material modification, particularly in specialized applications like stealth dicing and vertical slicing[1-3]. These applications are using the high peak intensity of ultrashort pulse to achieve minimum heat induced damage along the laser propagation area due to less total energy required and high center intensity at the focal point due to a series of ultrafast laser-matter interaction[4- 6]. Among various materials, 4H-Silicon Carbide (4H-SiC), a third-generation semiconductor,

[PAGE 3] demonstrates substantial potential due to its remarkable properties such as high thermal conductivity, chemical stability, and broad bandgap. Consequently, achieving efficient and minimal-damage vertical slicing of 4H-SiC is imperative for enhancing its applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices.[7- 9] Picosecond laser vertical slicing is to focus the laser inside 4H-SiC , the laser cause ablation zone inside the material, this damage includes laser ablation, shockwave induced damage [10] and the filamentation caused by the self-focus effect and plasma defocus effect [3, 11] which severely form a high longitudinal damage area causing high kerf loss[12, 13]. The cracks will induce a crack propagation alone the crystal cleavage plane.[14, 15] The laser ablation and shockwave induced damage are caused by laser pulse width, materials properties and laser intensity.[16, 17] Infrared picosecond laser is used in vertical slicing of 4H-SiC due to its high transmittance and high peak power.[12, 13] As reported, the laser filamentation is caused by the plasma defocusing and self-focusing due to the high peak intensity of the picosecond laser[18], another reason for filamentation is the spherical aberration caused by the mismatched refractive index of the air and 4H-SiC.[9, 19, 20] Thus, to achieve efficient vertical slicing with minimum kerf loss is to minimize the longitudinal damage and increasing vertical crack length. Recent technological advances have incorporated spatial light modulator (SLM) into laser processing systems.[21, 22] SLM generate corrections phase for spherical aberrations and enable from multi-focal generation[23] to pattern printing[24], enhancing processing efficiency and precision.[25] Meanwhile, for stealth dicing, multi-focal[26], longitudinal focal length enlarging[27] and pseud-Bessel laser[28] can boost the processing efficiency and precision. Vertical slicing is the technology likely to stealth dicing but the cracks inside material is perpendicular to the laser propagation direction. Thus, the multi-focal perpendicular to the laser could increase the vertical

[PAGE 4] slicing efficiency. However, traditional iterative methods for computer-generated holography (CGH) consume more time for high-speed manufacturing environments.[29-31] Researchers introduces fast iteration method like nonlinear point to point and use it into stealth dicing to improve the dicing quality[32] and is suitable for dynamic change in stealth dicing. This study enhances the non-iterative multi-focal generation method initially proposed by Zhu et al.[33, 34], tailored for laser vertical slicing of 4H-SiC. By integrating spherical aberration correction, our approach aims to eliminate aberrations due to refractive index mismatches, thus improving the quality and uniformity of the focal points. Through vectorial diffraction simulations and experimental validation, we have demonstrated that our method can significantly reduce surface roughness and damage zones in 4H-SiC. These results underscore the potential of our non-iterative holographic technique to revolutionize ultrafast laser processing, providing a practical pathway for efficient and precise vertical slicing of transparent materials like 4H-SiC. Using this method, we achieved the vertical slicing of 6-inch 4H-SiC ingot.

[PAGE 5] 2. Method 2.1 Vectorial diffraction modeling Fig.1 The principle of vectorial diffraction model and the scheme of spherical aberration caused by the mismatched refractive index As shown in Fig.1, in high numerical aperture (NA) scenarios, the electric field distribution at the focal points is based on the Richard-Wolf vectorial diffraction theory[35]. By taking the refractive index mismatched situation, as shown in Fig.1, the electric field vector 𝑬𝟐 in the focal region inside the material is expressed as follows: 𝑬𝟐= − ⅈ 2𝜋𝑛1𝑘0 𝑭{𝑇(𝜃1, 𝜃2, 𝜙)𝑬𝟏𝑒ⅈ𝑘0𝜑𝑆𝐴𝑒ⅈ𝑘𝑧𝑧𝑐𝑜𝑠 (𝜃1)} (1) Here, 𝑬𝟏 is the electric field vector at the incident pupil. The matrix 𝑇 represents the influence of the objective lens 𝛺 on different polarized incident components. In our experiments, the incident beam is linearly polarized, simplifying 𝑬𝟏 to a single component. 𝑑nom is the nominal depth of the focal points which equals to the objective lens movement along z-axis, 𝜑𝑆𝐴= 𝑑nom (𝑛2cos 𝜃2 −𝑛1cos 𝜃1) represents the spherical aberration (SA) phase introduced by the material, 𝑘𝑧𝑧= 𝑘2𝑧cos 𝜃2 describes

[PAGE 6] the intensity distribution as the beam propagates along the z-axis, 𝑘0 = 2𝜋/𝜆 is the wavenumber and 𝑘2is the wavenumber inside material, 𝑛1 and 𝑛2 are the refractive of air and 4H-SiC, respectively. The spherical aberration phase, 𝜑𝑆𝐴, will cause the energy distribution loss along the z-axis, leading the low vertical slicing efficiency and larger longitudinal laser ablation zone. Meanwhile, the energy uniformity of each focal point inside the material will cause the different ablation depth which will cause the higher kerf loss. The relationship between the 𝑬𝟏 and 𝑬𝟐 is the Fourier transformation relation as described in formula (1). The CGH added onto the exponential term in 𝑬𝟏 within the Fourier transformation relation should form multi uniform focal points in 𝑬𝟐, as well as eliminating the spherical aberration included by the SA terms. 2.2 CGH generation method We designed a non-iteration way to generate multi-focal inside material with spherical aberration correction. As shown in Fig.2 (a), the non-iteration is designed as two steps. First, the phase of focus shift is designed as: 𝜙𝑆(𝑥′, 𝑦′) = 2𝜋𝑁𝐴 𝜆 𝜌𝑚,𝑛Δ𝜌𝑚,𝑛, the shift is alone the x direction .By applying the segmentation function into the phase shift function which is shown as Δ𝜌(𝑀, 𝑁), the focus can be shift by designed equally. Second, we applied the spherical aberration correction term 𝜙𝑆𝐴𝐶(𝑥′, 𝑦′) as eq. (2). 𝜙𝑆𝐴𝐶(𝑥′, 𝑦′) = ( 1 𝑠√𝑛22 𝑁𝐴2 −𝜌𝑚,𝑛 2 −√𝑛12 𝑁𝐴2 −𝜌𝑚,𝑛 2 ) 𝑑nom (2) The SA phase term can be eliminated by substituting this term on the exponential part, and the focal position can be shifted into the designed depth. By taking the two term of focal point separation, the focal shift phase is described as: 𝜙(𝑥′, 𝑦′) = ∑ ∑ 2𝜋𝑁𝐴 𝜆 [𝜌𝑚,𝑛Δ𝜌𝑚,𝑛−( 1 𝑠√𝑛22 𝑁𝐴2 −𝜌𝑚,𝑛 2 −√𝑛12 𝑁𝐴2 −𝜌𝑚,𝑛 2 ) 𝑑nom] 𝑀 𝑚=1 𝑁 𝑛=1 (3) Where, 𝑀 and 𝑁 are the number of rows and the number of focal shifts, Δ𝜌𝑚,𝑛 is the focal shift of the