[PAGE 1] Photoluminescence of Femtosecond Laser-irradiated Silicon Carbide Photoluminescence of Femtosecond Laser-irradiated Silicon Carbide Y. Abdedou,1 A. Fuchs,2 P. Fuchs,2 J. Heiler,3, 4 D. Herrmann,2 S. Weber,5 M. Schäfer,5 J. L’huillier,5 F. Kaiser,3, 4 C. Becher,2 and E. Neu1 1)RPTU University Kaiserslautern-Landau, Department of Physics and State Research Center OPTIMAS, Kaiserslautern, Germany Erwin-Schroedinger-Strasse, 67663 Kaiserslautern. Germany 2)Universität des Saarlandes, Fachrichtung Physik, Campus E2.6, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany 3)Quantum Materials, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), 28 Avenue des Hauts Fourneaux, 4362 Belval, Luxembourg 4)University of Luxembourg, 2 Avenue de l’Université, 4365 Belval, Luxembourg 5)Institut für Oberflächen- und Schichttechnik GmbH, Research Center OPTIMAS, RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau, 67663 Kaiserslautern Germany (*Electronic mail: nruffing@rptu.de) (Dated: 31 March 2026) Silicon carbide (SiC) is the leading wide-bandgap semiconductor material, providing mature doping and device fab- rication. Additionally, SiC hosts a multitude of optically active point defects (color centers) and is relevant for many applications in quantum technologies. A crucial step towards harnessing the full potential of the SiC platform includes technologies to create color cen- ters with defined localization and density, e.g. to facilitate their coupling to nano-photonic structures and to observe cooperative effects. Here, silicon vacancy centers and divacancies stand out as no impurity atom is needed and high- thermal budget annealing steps can be avoided. We characterize the effect of localized, femtosecond laser irradiation of SiC, investigating surface modifications and photoluminescence including Raman spectroscopy and optical lifetime measurements. We employ commercial high-purity, semi-insulating substrates and an industrial grade laser system to explore broader applicability of the method. As a novel approach, we apply femtosecond laser irradiation to SiC substrates with an epitaxial graphene layer and find that the threshold for photoluminescence due to laser treatment is lowered. Keywords: silicon carbide, femtosecond laser irradiation, color centers, quantum technologies I. INTRODUCTION Silicon carbide (SiC) has seen tremendous improvements as a semiconductor platform in recent years, especially in terms of crystal quality and wafer sizes that can now reach up to 8 inch. Together with these improvements, it has also been established as a host material for single color cen- ters and their applications in quantum technologies. Sili- con vacancy centers (VSi) have several favorable character- istics for applications in quantum technologies. In 4H-SiC, they exist in two different configurations1 corresponding to a missing silicon atom at a cubic and a hexagonal lattice site. The defects show zero phonon lines at 861 nm for V1 (cu- bic) and 916 nm for V2 (hexagonal)2,3. Moreover, VSi do provide an optically readable ground-state spin with a zero field splitting of 4.5 MHz for V1 and 70 MHz for V22,4 which is addressable with standard RF components. How- ever, the contrast of this optically detected magnetic reso- nance (ODMR) is comparably low (a few %). An addi- tional challenge is the fact that VSi luminescence is hard to collect in (0001) SiC, because of the VSi dipole orientation in the SiC lattice. (0001) material is however the material with the highest commercial availability. Milestones include super-radiance5 from two color centers, near-transform lim- ited emission even in photonic nanostructures6 as well as mag- netic sensors working under extremely harsh conditions like high pressure7. SiC has also emerged as a promising plat- form for epitaxial graphene growth by sublimation of SiC enabling the straightforward fabrication of large area, high quality graphene directly on a semiconducting substrate8–10. Due to its high carrier mobility11 graphene has many pos- sible applications in various fields12 such as high frequency transistors13, photonics14,15 and also with VSi as transparent electrodes for Stark shift tuning of quantum systems16. Localized VSi have been created by various techniques: ion implantation (focused ion beams17 or implantation through a mask18) or laser writing19–21. Ion-based techniques in prin- ciple allow for the highest precision in localization which has been shown to be mainly limited by the straggle of the ions which is in the range of tens of nanometers for keV ion implantation22. However, they also create high levels of dam- age and potential additional defects and require costly equip- ment. Laser writing has been investigated as an alternative that relies on highly non-linear processes. Previous works suggest the involvement of 16 photons in the generation of a vacancy defect in SiC19. With such an extremely non-linear process, even an optical technology allows for precise local- ization that has been estimated to be as good as 80 nm19. To address different applications in quantum technologies, not only controlling the spatial placement but also varying the density of color centers is crucial: whereas single photon sources naturally require using a single color center, higher density ensembles can be favorable for highly sensitive mag- netic sensors based on optically-readable spins. In this case, higher defect density enables brighter fluorescence and thus reduces photon shot noise in the optical read-out. Moreover, arXiv:2404.09906v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 30 Mar 2026

[PAGE 2] Photoluminescence of Femtosecond Laser-irradiated Silicon Carbide 2 enhancing defect density in ensembles may allow to observe the transition from uncoupled to collective emission (super- radiance)23. Laser writing can be used to create single VSi in 4H-SiC as well as ensembles19. However, the creation of dense en- sembles requires higher pulse energies that are well above the ablation threshold, leading to increased damages to the crystal24. In the context of localized creation of color centers, ablation processes are a parasitic effect and will limit the cre- ation of dense color center ensembles. We here perform laser processing using a commercial laser structuring system irradi- ating commercial HPSI SiC. We elucidate if laser processing is compatible with using epitaxial graphene layers that have been suggested as transparent electrode to electrically tune color centers. We here report on the photoluminescence (PL) from localized laser irradiated areas, we analyze surface mor- phology, Raman spectra as well as PL spectra and lifetimes. II. SAMPLE PRE-TREATMENT A 4-inch (0001) oriented HPSI 4H-SiC wafer purchased from Wolfspeed was diced into quadratic chips of < 10x10 mm2. Diced chips were then solvent-cleaned with acetone and isopropanol to remove the protective resist layer applied for dicing. Surfaces are chemically mechanically polished to a roughness of < 0.5 nm according to manufacturer specifi- cations. On the first sample, an epitaxial graphene layer was grown at 1600°C10. The second sample was annealed in vac- uum (5.5 x 10−7 mbar) at 800°C for 3 hours. Annealing at temperatures above 600°C has been found to reduce the con- centration of VSi18,25 where ab initio calculations show that VSi migrate and recombine to form pairs of antisite vacancy (CSiVC)26,27. III. IRRADIATION OF HPSI WITH GRAPHENE LAYER We irradiate our 4H-SiC samples using an industrial grade laser structuring system (BlueCut, Menlo Systems GmbH, repetition rate 10 kHz) with a wavelength of 1030 nm, a pulse duration of 383 fs and a repetition rate up to 1 MHz at a max- imum pulse energy of 10 µJ. We focus the beam using a Thor- labs LMH-20X-1064 objective with 0.4 NA. The laser beam is linearly polarized. The focused beam had a calculated di- ameter of 2.4 µm (1/e2) in air. The sample was then cleaned in acetone in an ultrasonic bath to remove particles collected on the surface during processing. The laser-written patterns labeled pattern 1 and 2 were imaged using a commercial scan- ning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi SU8000) in figure 1 a) and c), and with a white-light optical microscope in figure 1 e), corresponding to the pattern shown in figure 1 c). The top row and the leftmost column serve as markers, on pattern 1 we used 5 pulses per spot at 520 nJ on figure 1 a) (230 nJ on figure 1 c) for pattern 2), and 10 pulses per spot with pulse energy ranging from 230 nJ to 520 nJ on figure 1 a) for pat- tern 1 (60 nJ to 230 nJ on figure 1 c) for pattern 2) for the leftmost column to induce a clear surface modification. The rows of spots visible within this marker angle were processed using a single pulse of the laser with pulse energies ranging from 230 nJ to 520 nJ on figure 1 a) for pattern 1 (60 nJ to 230 nJ on figure 1 c) for pattern 2). This preliminary investi- gation by SEM and white-light microscopy already indicates a challenge in laser writing of (dense) color center ensembles: In the regions where multiple pulses have been used for pro- cessing, around the laser processed area a structure occurs that is due to laser ablation and re-deposition of material. This re- deposited material however will not be of high quality and is typically observed to be amorphous21. We assume that light gray areas in figure 1 a) and c) are graphene while darker parts are attributed to be the bare 4H- SiC surface. In darker areas, graphene on the surface ap- pears to be removed, likely occurring during laser process- ing when ablated material was ejected scratching the surface. Additional damage may have occurred during sample han- dling. Although laser written spots exhibit a contrast simi- lar to that of the surrounding graphene layer, this does not necessarily indicate that graphene remains at these sites, as all pulse energies used are well above the ablation thresh- old of graphene28,29. Instead, their higher brightness com- pared to the bare substrate may arise from surface modifi- cation/ablation of 4H-SiC induced by laser pulses, as ob- served in femtosecond laser ablation of 4H-SiC studies30,31. To further study surface modifications on the graphene and 4H-SiC, atomic force microscope (AFM) measurements were performed on both patterns 1 and 2 using a commercial AFM (Park AFM XE-70). AFM images are shown in figures 1 b) and d) which are associated to laser written patterns 1 and 2 in 1 a) and c). The femtosecond laser pulses created craters on the 4H-SiC surface as observed in literature20. On figure 2 a) and b), we measured the depth and width (FWHM) of the craters created during the laser processing. We observe dif- ferent trends for the the higher pulse-energy pattern (pattern 1) and lower pulse-energy pattern (pattern 2). On the lower energy pattern, depth and width increase up to 140 nJ and de- crease until 200 nJ for the depth and 230 nJ for the width. At 230 nJ, the average depth is 40 nm bigger in the higher pulse energy pattern and the spots are 0.5 µm wider. On the other hand, in the higher energy pattern, spot depth remains rela- tively constant with increasing pulse energy, while spots width tends to decrease with pulse energy until 480 nJ. We assume that these differing evolutions of spot dimensions as a func- tion of pulse energy between the two patterns arise from vari- ations in laser focusing while moving the sample to different writing locations. Figure 2 c) shows Raman spectra taken in a home-built confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscope (CLSM), labeled CLSM 1. In CLSM 1, the sample was cooled down to 4.3 K in a closed-cycle cryostat (CryoVac). In CLSM 1, we excite the SiC sample using a tunable titanium sapphire laser (Sirah Matisse) operating at 737.19 nm focused on the sample with a microscope objective (Olympus MPLN 100x, NA = 0.9). PL and Raman scattered light is collected using the same objective and reflected laser light is rejected using a 740 nm dichroic mirror. Transmitted PL is further filtered with a longpass filter and coupled to a single mode fiber that can either be connected to an APD (Excelitas SPCM-AQRH)

[PAGE 3] Photoluminescence of Femtosecond Laser-irradiated Silicon Carbide 3 FIG. 1. a) and c) SEM images of laser written patterns 1 and 2 on the HPSI 4H-SiC sample with a graphene layer, with pulse energy ranging from 230-520 nJ (pattern 1) on a) and 60-230 nJ (pattern 2) on c). b) and d) respective AFM measurements of the patterns in a) and c). e) White-light optical microscope image of the laser written pattern on the sample with graphene with higher pulse energy on the top row (230 nJ) and lower pulse energy on the bottom row (60 nJ) f) Associated confocal PL map of the laser written pattern on c) and e). or a spectrometer (Horiba iHR550) equipped with a 600 lines per mm grating and a Peltier cooled CCD camera. Measure- ments were performed on an unprocessed part of the sample, a written spot at 520 nJ and a marker made with a train of 10 pulses at 520 nJ. The Raman lines observed on the substrate are characteristic of 4H-SiC. At 520 nJ pulse energy, the writ- ten spots exhibit Raman lines with intensities comparable to the labeled peaks from the unprocessed substrate. Whereas, compared to the substrate, TO(E2), LO(A1) and TO(E1) peaks from the marker have smaller intensities and are broadened, TO(E1) is shifted and LA(A1) is not visible, indicating severe damages caused by the train of 10 pulses. While this Raman spectrum shows no sign of amorphous material even for 1850 nJ, the strong decrease in Raman peak intensity has been asso- ciated with significant crystal damage in previous work20. The Raman spectrum does not show clear evidence for remaining graphene in accordance with the observation of ablation of material at the surface. To investigate photoluminescence from the laser processed area, we use another home-built CLSM labeled CLSM 2. In CSLM 2, we perform room temperature characterization. We use continuous 785 nm laser light (Coherent OBIS LX 785) for excitation. In addition, we can couple a tunable, pulsed super-continuum laser source (NKT Super K-Extreme, typi- cal pulse width < 100 ps) which we use to measure the ex- cited state lifetime τ of the observed PL. In both cases, we use a 100x microscope objective with 0.9 NA (Zeiss EC EPN 100x/0,9 DIC) to focus the laser onto the sample and to col- lect PL in a reflection geometry. We separate PL and reflected laser light using a 785 nm edge dichroic mirror (Semrock Laser-Beamsplitter HC R785 lambda/5 PV flat). We detect PL using silicon avalanche photo-diodes (APDs) for spectrally- integrated detection (Excelitas SPCM-AQRH-14). Alterna- tively, we sent the PL to a spectrometer equipped with a sil- icon CCD (Princeton Instruments Acton Standard SP-2558 Spectrometer with Pixis 256E CCD). In both cases, we use a 850 nm long pass filter for additional laser filtering. Figure 1 f) shows a room temperature confocal PL map of pattern 2 from figure 1. c). Localized PL is visible resembling the regular array that was processed by irradiating the SiC sample with single laser pulses, however, a significant level of PL also originates from areas not irradiated by the laser due to already present native defects remaining in our substrate, the PL ratio between the written spots at 60 nJ (bottom-most row) with the background is only ~2. IV. IRRADIATION OF PRISTINE HPSI SIC As a reference, we treated a pristine HPSI 4H-SiC substrate using the same method described in the previous section, ex- cept using for this sample a repetition rate of 100 kHz to make the markers: we wrote a pattern on the surface with pulse en- ergies ranging from 60 nJ (bottom row) to 1850 nJ (top row). Figure 3 a) shows a white-light optical microscope image of the resulting pattern. Figure 3 b) shows a confocal PL map of the laser processed area. The bottom-most row has been ex- posed to 60 nJ laser pulses, here, PL intensity is even slightly reduced compared to the surrounding, unprocessed SiC. This could be attributed to local annealing32 and surface modifica- tion as our 60 nJ pulses have energies above the reported mod- ification threshold30 but below the ablation threshold31 neces- sary to create vacancies. Ref.19 identifies the process that cre- ates VSi in SiC as highly non-linear. According to Ref.19, 16

[PAGE 4] Photoluminescence of Femtosecond Laser-irradiated Silicon Carbide 4 Reference λ tp Laser Focusing Objective EP IP Comments 19 790 nm 250 fs 1.4 NA 60x oil 10.7 nJ 22.2 TW/cm2 Threshold for creating single VSi 33 1030 nm 230 fs 0.9 NA 100x 58 nJ 30.2 TW/cm2 Threshold for PL creation in the treated area This work 1030 nm 383 fs 0.4 NA 20x 60 nJ 5 TW/cm2 Lowest pulse energy used, onset of PL for 4H-SiC with graphene This work 1030 nm 383 fs 0.4 NA 20x 230 nJ 19.2 TW/cm2 Onset of PL for pristine 4H-SiC TABLE I. Summary of femtosecond lasers and optics parameter used in this works and for various previous work. tp is the pulse duration, EP the pulse energy and IP the corresponding peak intensity. FIG. 2. a) and b) AFM measured depth and width (FWHM) of the laser written spots on the HPSI 4H-SiC sample with a graphene layer.c) Raman spectra of the unprocessed HPSI 4H-SiC with graphene, a spot irradiated using a 520 nJ pulse and a marker. Spectra are offset vertically for clarity. photons at a wavelength of 790 nm are involved in creating a single VSi defect. For such a highly non-linear process (among other parameters), the peak intensity of the laser pulse will be crucial. We thus compare the laser and optics parameters in our work to previous work in table I. We find a slightly lower threshold than previously reported for the onset of PL on the pristine sample and a strongly reduced threshold for the sam- ple with graphene. This could be explained by the absorptance of graphene which is 2.3 %34 compared to only 0.16% at its surface in 4H-SiC at 1030 nm35 making it 14 times higher. Figure 4. c) shows Raman spectra taken using a commer- cial Raman spectrometer with a 532 nm excitation laser on the pristine sample from an unprocessed area and from spots written at 60 nJ, 230 nJ and 1850 nJ. Raman spectra taken from dimples made with single pulse at 60 nJ show reduced peak intensities most notably on the TO(E2) and LO(A1) peaks compared to unprocessed 4H-SiC. At 230 nJ and 1850 nJ, the decrease in peak intensities is even more significant, being maximal at 1850 nJ, again indicating significant damage to the crystal lattice. To further analyze the structures, we again em- ploy AFM measurements. The resulting image in figure 3. d) shows spots made with single pulses from 230 nJ to 1850 nJ. For the spots irradiated with 60 nJ, a shallow surface modifi- cation is visible. For spots written with pulse energy between 230 nJ to 860 nJ ablated material results in a crater-like hole. At higher pulse energy, we find a dimple with a hillock in the middle and ring shaped wall in the outer area. Figure 4 a) and b) summarize the depth and width of the surface structures. We add two datasets in each graph: we estimate the depth by measuring the distance between the surface and the deepest spot in the structure and we approximate the structure using a Gaussian fit. As discernible from figure 4 a) and b) this gives us similar absolute values and a similar trend: size and width of the surface structures roughly grow with pulse ener- gies up to 750 nJ. The diameter (width at 1/e2) of the features obtained above 1250 nJ with roughly 2.5 µm matches the di- ameter of the laser beam’s Gaussian intensity profile that is 2.4 µm. However, for pulse energies above 860 nJ, deviations from a Gaussian shape occur. We then perform PL spectroscopy of the bright spots cre- ated by irradiation with single laser pulses. For all photo- luminescent spots, we obtain typical room temperature spec- tra as displayed in figure 3 c). This very broad PL spectrum without a discernible zero-phonon line has been identified as the typical PL signature of VSi at room temperature3. The measured PL intensities and the fact that second order photon correlation measurements on the bright spots show no anti- bunching point defect ensembles. Room temperature spectra are similar to previous work20. We measure PL saturation curves for each laser irradiated spot and average over the measurements on the spots irradi- ated with the same pulse energy. Figure 5 a) exemplary shows the saturation measurement for spots irradiated with 230 nJ. To correct the data for background, we perform a saturation measurement at a spot 10 µm downward from the row written at 60 nJ. We correct the data points by subtracting the back- ground. We note that the PL background also showed a satu- ration behavior. This might indicate that native point defects contribute to the background as reported previously33. Figure 5 b) shows the saturation count rate as a function of the writ- ing pulse energy. Saturation count rates increase linearly with laser pulse energy indicating a linear increase of luminescent defects with pulse energy assuming a constant emission rate for each created defect. On the other hand, we will below discuss changes on excited state lifetimes that indicate non- radiative processes and thus changes in the emission rates. In addition, modifying the surface profile (Figure 4), espe- cially for increased pulse energy also changes the crystalline properties of SiC in the vicinity of the spots20,21,36. When aiming to create VSi, carbon vacancies (VC) are also created nearby due to their low formation energy. Carbon vacancies

[PAGE 5] Photoluminescence of Femtosecond Laser-irradiated Silicon Carbide 5 FIG. 3. a) White-light optical microscope image of the laser-processed pattern observed on the surface. The top row and the leftmost column serve as a marker, here we used a train of 5 pulses per spot at 1850 nJ for the top row (cyan box), and 10 pulses per spot with pulse energy ranging from 60 to 1850 nJ for the leftmost column to induce a clear surface modification (red box). The rows of spots visible within this marker angle have been processed using a single pulse of the laser with pulse energies ranging from 60 - 1850 nJ (pink box). b) Confocal PL map of the laser written pattern presented in FIG. 3 a). PL with wavelengths > 850 nm was detected. From top to bottom, the rows have been written with 1850, 1590, 1250, 860, 520, 230 and 60 nJ (single pulse per spot).c) Exemplary PL spectrum from a spot irradiated with 860 nJ. d) AFM image of the laser written pattern. are not optically active. They provide non-radiative decay paths for VSi therefore quenching their PL19,37,38. Figure5. d) summarizes the lifetimes τ extracted from PL measurements (> 850 nm). Again, we obtain by averaging measurements from all spots irradiated with the same pulse energy. For spots irradiated with 230 nJ pulses, we find τ = 6.2 ns which matches τVSi = 6.1 ns obtained for VSi created using electron irradiation39 again hinting at the creation of VSi . τ linearly decreases with pulse energy, indicating quenching by VC and also potential interaction with extended defects due to laser irradiation. In contrast, the saturation power as displayed in figure 5 c) did not change with pulse energy. To obtain more information on the defects created by the laser writing process, both samples (graphene and pristine) and a reference HPSI 4H-SiC sample implanted with 350 keV protons at a dose of 1×1015 cm−2 were cooled down to 4.3K in the CLSM 1 setup described in the previous section. Figure 6 a) compares the cryogenic spectra of three 4H-SiC samples: ion-implanted reference sample, laser written pris- tine sample, and laser written sample with a graphene layer. The reference sample exhibits peaks associated with silicon vacancies (VSi), including V1’ at 858 nm, V1 at 861 nm, and V2 at 916 nm, in agreement with literature. While our room-temperature spectra and lifetime measure- ments strongly suggested the localized formation of VSi (see figure 3 d) and figure 5 d)), we do not observe ZPL emis- sion from VSi at cryogenic temperatures in both laser-written samples. This suggests that efficient, localized creation of VSi is not feasible under our experimental conditions and using HPSI material. Our findings align with those reported in33, where VSi centers were detected in laser-written regions but only with a weak enhancement relative to the non-irradiated substrate. Moreover, as summarized in table I previous laser writing work performed at the same 1030 nm wavelength did not show ZPL related toVSi, only PL creation and typical room temperature spectra were observed. VSi centers occurring be- fore laser writing in our substrates were likely eliminated due to the high-temperature annealing for the pristine sample and the graphene growth for the other sample. The PL spectrum of the sample with graphene exhibits peaks corresponding to the TS center at 769 nm, 812 nm, and 813 nm (TS1, TS2, and TS3, respectively)40. To determine whether TS centers form during laser writing or graphene growth, we analyzed spectra from a laser-written spot (520 nJ) and an unprocessed region of the substrate, as shown in figure 6 b). The absence of significant spectral differences suggests that TS centers originate from the graphene growth

[PAGE 6] Photoluminescence of Femtosecond Laser-irradiated Silicon Carbide 6 FIG. 4. a) Average depth of the laser written spots in function of the laser pulse energy measured on spots profiles in orange and given by a fit with a Gaussian in blue. b) Average width (FWHM) of the laser written spots in function of the laser pulse energy. c) Raman spectra of the unmodified pristine HPSI 4H-SiC and of spots made at different laser pulse energies of 60 nJ, 230 nJ and 1850 nJ. The spectra are offset vertically for clarity and have been recorded using a 532 nm laser. FIG. 5. a) Comparison of saturation of PL induced via laser process- ing on the pristine 4H-SiC and 4H-SiC with a graphene layer of spots written with a 230 nJ pulse energy. b) Saturation count rate detecting PL with wavelengths longer than 850 nm in function of laser pulse energy. c) Saturation power associated with the saturation count rate in function of the pulse energy, dashed line shows the mean satura- tion power at 4.72 mW. d) Lifetime measurements detecting PL with wavelengths longer than 850 nm in function of the pulse energy. FIG. 6. a) PL spectra at 4.3K taken on a reference ion implanted sample which is compared to a laser written spot at 1590 nj on the pristine sample and a laser written spot at 520 nJ on the sample with graphene. Peaks associated with VSi are labeled V1’ (858 nm), V1 (861 nm) and V2 (916 nm). Peaks associated to the TS center are labeled TS1 (769 nm), TS2 (812 m) and TS3 (813 nm). b) Low temperature spectra (4.3K) of the sample with graphene taken on an unprocessed area (blue) and a laser written spot (520 nJ) (orange). FIG. 7. PL spectra at 5K taken on the pristine 4H-SiC sample at different position, unprocessed region (blue), around a written spot at 1850 nJ far from the markers (orange) around a written spot at 1850 nJ close to the markers (green). process and not from laser irradiation. Additionally, the Ra- man spectra of both regions exhibits comparable intensity and linewidth, indicating similar levels of crystal damage. The TS defect is known to withstand high annealing temperatures, but its microscopic origin remains uncertain and TS centers can- not serve as indicators for studying the laser-writing process. The absence of VSi in laser-written regions may suggest that