[PAGE 1] Experimental study on the full-coverage ﬁlm cooling of fan-shaped holes with a constant exit width H. Wei a, Y.Q. Zu a,⇑, J.L. Ai a, L. Ding b a Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Fudan University, 220 Handan Road, Shanghai 200433, China b AECC Commercial Aircraft Engine Co., LTD, 3998 Lianhua South Road, Shanghai 200241, China a r t i c l e i n f o Article history: Received 3 December 2018 Received in revised form 18 April 2019 Accepted 21 May 2019 Available online 11 June 2019 Keywords: Experimental study Adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness Full-coverage ﬁlm cooling Fan-shaped hole Discharge coefﬁcient Correlation a b s t r a c t In the present study, the full-coverage ﬁlm cooling characteristics of the fan-shaped holes with a constant lateral width at the exits are investigated under a wide range of blowing ratio from 0.5 to 7.5. The fan- shaped holes with inclination angles of 20, 25 and 30 and expansion angles of 10 and 13 are consid- ered. Adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness of the holes is measured using thermo-chromic liquid crystal technology. Meanwhile, the corresponding ﬂow characteristics are illustrated by numerical simulation. Effects of the inclination angle and the expansion angle as well as the blowing ratio on the cooling effec- tiveness and discharge coefﬁcient of the holes are analyzed. Compared to cylindrical holes, the fan- shaped holes have obvious advantages in terms of adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness and discharge coef- ﬁcient. The inclination angle of the fan-shaped hole shows a dominant impact on the separation motion inside the hole, which then governs the vortex structure and the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness downstream. The row-by-row interaction of the coolant jets, as one of the important features of full-coverage ﬁlm cool- ing, normally leads to the weakness of the vortices downstream the holes and therefore the better cooling performance. In order to further quantify the full-coverage ﬁlm cooling performance and throughﬂow losses of the holes, correlations of experimental data for area-averaged effectiveness and discharge coef- ﬁcient are developed.  2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction Pursuing high overall efﬁciency and power output for both industrial and propulsion gas turbine engines has caused a contin- uous increase in combustion exit gas temperature, which typically exceeds the melting points of exposed combustor and downstream turbine components. Developing effective cooling schemes for such high-temperature components has subsequently become a critical issue. Among the various cooling techniques, ﬁlm cooling [1] is extensively used as one of the most efﬁcient solutions for improving the thermal protection of the high-temperature components. In the last several decades, ﬁlm cooling technique has been researched exhaustively. Two comprehensive reviews on the development of ﬁlm cooling technology over the years were offered by Goldstein [1], and Bogard and Thole [2], with the third more speciﬁc review for shaped ﬁlm cooling holes by Bunker [3]. In addition, as compared to the discrete holes, more effective ﬁlm cooling scheme could be realized by utilizing multiple rows of holes to form full-coverage ﬁlm cooling, namely, the so called effu- sion cooling. A detailed review for effusion cooling could be found in Krewinkel [4]. Generally, fan-shaped holes are believed to have a superior ﬁlm cooling performance than cylindrical holes. For the cylindrical hole, the coolant tends to blow-off due to the stronger counter-rotating vortex structure, namely, the so-called kidney vortex [5], reducing the cooling performance. For the fan-shaped hole, however, the expanded structure not only allows a better lateral spreading of the coolant but also has the advantages in term of the vortex sys- tem. Firstly, the strength of the kidney vortex is weakened due to the reduced exit momentum of the coolant jet [6,7]; Secondly, the distance between the counter rotating branches of the kidney vortex is increased due to the separation motion inside the hole [7–9]; Finally, an additional unsteady vortex pair, which is counter rotating to the kidney vortex, forms to reduce the strength of the kidney vortex [7,10,11]. All of these vortex features contribute to the suppression of the coolant jet blow-off. The experimental study of Goldstein et al. [6] is normally regarded as the ﬁrst groundbreaking work on fan-shaped ﬁlm cool- ing holes. In the study, both cylindrical holes and fan-shaped holes with an expansion angle of 10 were considered. The results indi- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.05.065 0017-9310/ 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. ⇑Corresponding author. E-mail address: yzu@fudan.edu.cn (Y.Q. Zu). International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 140 (2019) 379–398 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhmt

[PAGE 2] cated that either a single or a row of fan-shaped holes signiﬁcantly enhanced the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness as compared to cylindrical holes. Kohli and Bogard [12] reported an experimental study of 55-inclined holes arranged in a single row. Three kinds of holes including a cylindrical hole and two laidback fan-shaped holes were tested at a density ratio of 1.6. The results manifested that, in the whole range of momentum ﬂux ratios, the laidback fan- shaped ﬁlm cooling holes generate higher spatial averaged adia- batic cooling efﬁciency than that of the cylindrical holes, especially at high blowing ratios. Bonanni [13] utilized thermo-chromic liq- uid crystal (TLC) technology to measure the heat transfer coefﬁ- cient and adiabatic ﬁlm cooling efﬁciency of two kinds of laidback fan-shaped holes with different exit area ratios for blow- ing ratios varied from 0.5 to 2.5. The obtained results indicated that the lateral distribution of cooling effectiveness was primarily inﬂu- enced by the outlet-to-inlet area ratio of the holes. Bell et al. [14] measured the cooling performance of the ﬁlm holes arranged in a single row on a large scale ﬂat plate, and concluded that, for ﬁve different shapes of holes considered, the fan-shaped holes with lat- erally diffused, compound angle produced a better cooling ﬁlm protection. In the study of Colban et al. [15], row-by-row interac- tion of multi-row of fan-shaped holes on a gas turbine vane was evaluated as compared to the performance of a single row of fan- shaped holes in the same locations. It was observed that the multi-row cooling could provide the overall higher effectiveness than the single-row cooling. Colban et al. [16] developed a correla- tion to predict laterally averaged ﬁlm cooling effectiveness down- stream of a single row of fan-shaped holes on a ﬂat plate surface. In the correlation, the effects of blowing ratio, coverage ratio and the outlet-to-inlet area ratio of the holes were taken into considera- tion. Recently, Sun et al. [17] carried out a novel investigation into the inﬂuence of hole shape on the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness for a constant exit ﬂow area. Four kinds of holes (i.e. the cylindrical hole, the fan-shaped hole, the double jet holes and the hole accompa- nied with sister holes) were studied with the blowing ratio varied from 0.3 to 1.5. The results showed that the shaped holes had an obvious advantage in cooling performance as compared to the cylindrical hole. Moreover, it was found that the expanded struc- ture of the fan-shaped hole can effectively suppress the coolant jet blow-off over the widest range of the blowing ratios, and the interaction between the coolant and the mainstream did not form so obvious vortex structure as the other kinds of the holes. As a result, the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness of the fan-shaped hole increased monotonically as the blowing ratio raised up to 1.5, while the cylindrical hole, the double jet holes and the hole accom- panied with sister holes achieved the optimal cooling effectiveness at the blowing ratios of 0.5, 0.8 and 0.8, respectively. A substantial number of numerical works have been performed as well to demonstrate and even optimize the coolant behavior and cooling effectiveness of fan-shaped ﬁlm cooling structures. Bian- chini et al. [18] conducted a Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) analysis of a single laidback fan-shaped hole on a ﬂat plate at the blowing ratios of 1.25 and 2.5 to evaluate the relative perfor- mance of four types of turbulence models. It was found that the ﬂow and heat transfer predicted by either shear stress transport (SST) k-x model or v2 - f model were in good agreement with those of experimental measurements. Saumweber and Schulz [9] evalu- ated the inﬂuence of geometric parameters (the expansion angle, the inclination angle, and the length of the cylindrical part at the entrance) of the fan-shaped holes on the ﬁlm cooling performance. It was noticed that the ﬂow conditions affected the cooling perfor- mance of cylindrical and fan-shaped holes in a very different way. Nevertheless, the ﬂow and heat transfer characteristics from the fan-shaped cooling holes were very complex so that it was difﬁcult to derive a mathematical formulation to describe the combined effects of ﬂow condition change and hole geometry variation. Recently, Fu et al. [19,20] conducted a direct numerical simulation (DNS) of ﬂat-plate ﬁlm cooling with a single fan-shaped hole under low Reynolds number conditions. The effects of mainstream Rey- nolds number, boundary layer thickness and turbulence intensity on ﬁlm cooling effectiveness and vortex structure were analyzed. The results indicated that, with the increase of mainstream Rey- nolds number, hairpin vortices become smaller, but horseshoe vor- tices become more evident. As a result, the vertically mixing effect induced by the hairpin vortices was weakened, and the lateral development of the coolant jet caused by the horseshoe vortices Nomenclature A total area of hole entrances BR blowing ratio Cd discharge coefﬁcient D entrance diameter of ﬁlm holes (mm) ER ﬁtting error _m mass ﬂow rate (kg/s) N number of the holes P pressure (Pa) PR pressure ratio R gas constant (J/(kgK)) T temperature (K) T  non-dimensional temperature u ﬂow velocity (m/s) uz z-component of velocity (m/s) W lateral width of hole exit (mm) x coordinate along stream-wise (mm) X stream-wise spacing of cooling holes (mm) y coordinate along span-wise (mm) yþ non-dimensional distance normal to a wall Y span-wise spacing of cooling holes (mm) z coordinate normal to wall (mm) a inclination angle b expansion angle j ratio of speciﬁc heats q density (kg/m3) g adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness Xx x-component of vorticity (1/s) Subscript c coolant ﬂow s static t total w wall 1 mainstream Superscript  line averaged value  area averaged value Correlation Constants a, a0, a1, b, b0, b1, b2, c, c0, d, e, f – n0, n1, n2, f0, f1, f2 – 380 H. Wei et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 140 (2019) 379–398

[PAGE 3] was enhanced, leading to an improved ﬁlm cooling effectiveness. The authors believed that the hairpin vortices are the chief instiga- tor of the coolant jet blow-off. Since the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness of the fan-shaped holes sensitively depend on the geometric parameters, some researchers [21–26] have devoted to the shape optimization of the ﬁlm cooling holes for achieving the most favor- able ﬁlm cooling performance. Most of the optimization works [21–25] focused on a single hole or a sing row of holes on the ﬂat plate, while Jiang et al. [26] conducted an optimization of multi- row ﬁlm cooling of a realistic marine high pressure turbine vane with consideration of the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness and aerody- namic loss. In addition to the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness, the discharge coef- ﬁcient of the hole is another crucial parameter for an accurate and reliable design avoiding the coolant over- or under-feed condi- tions. Hay and Lampard [27] have given a comprehensive review of the factors that affect the discharge coefﬁcient. As reported by Saumweber and Schulz [8,9], Hay and Lampard [27], Hay and Spen- cer [28], Gritsch et al. [29] and Hüning [30], the important factors that affect the discharge coefﬁcient include hole geometric param- eters such as hole expansion angle, length-to-diameter ratio, incli- nation/orientation angle, and radiusing/chamfering at hole entrance and exit, as well as the ﬂow conditions like hole rotation, inlet-to-outlet pressure ratio, Reynolds number inside the hole, inlet/outlet cross-ﬂow etc. Saumweber and Schulz [8,9] and Gritsh et al. [31] conducted a series of comparative studies on the dis- charge coefﬁcients of cylindrical hole, fan-shaped hole and laid- back fan-shaped hole. The obtained results revealed that the discharge coefﬁcients of the laterally diffused holes are higher than that of the cylindrical holes, especially at a relatively lower pres- sure ratio. Moreover, the additional forward expansion at the hole exit had little inﬂuence on the discharge coefﬁcient. It is noticed that most of previous investigations mainly concen- trated on the ﬂow and/or heat transfer of ﬁlm cooling from a single fan-shaped hole or a single row of fan-shaped holes. Very few research works have paid attention to the mechanism of the multi-row of fan-shaped ﬁlm cooling holes with row-by-row inter- actions, although combustor walls and turbine components are more likely to utilize the full-coverage ﬁlm cooling to achieve high ﬁlm cooling efﬁciency. Moreover, it is well known that a wider exit of the fan-shaped hole normally results in a better coverage of coolant on the protected wall, so that the hole with wider exit has better cooling performance. Therefore, it is not fair to compare the holes with different exit widths. Thus, in the present study, the full-coverage ﬁlm cooling effectiveness from ten rows of staggered fan-shaped holes with a constant lateral width at the exits is mea- sured under a wide range of blowing ratio from 0.5 to 7.5 using thermo-chromic liquid crystal technique. The holes with the incli- nation angles of 20, 25 and 30 and the expansion angles of 10 and 13 are considered. To further understand the characteristic effects associated with contouring of the hole, the fan-shaped holes are compared to an adequate cylindrical hole in terms of adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness as well as discharge coefﬁcients. Numer- ical simulations are carried out as well under the same hole geo- metrical and ﬂow conditions to illustrate the coolant behaviors and corresponding cooling characteristics. 2. Experimental facilities and procedures 2.1. Experimental equipment The present measurement is undertaken using a unique wind tunnel system which is designed and assembled at the Wind Tun- nel Laboratory of the Fudan University. As shown in Fig. 1, the sys- tem mainly consists of two parts: one is a re-circulating wind tunnel for mainstream, the other is an open-circuit wind tunnel for secondary stream supply. With suitable data acquisition and controlling units equipped, it can be able to provide effusion ﬁlm cooling, impingement cooling and even integrated impingement/ pin/effusion cooling data. The mainstream wind tunnel is driven by a 40KW centrifugal blower. As shown in Fig. 1, the air in the tunnel can be heated by a pair of special designed 60KW guide-vane heaters at two corners of the tunnel. With a self-designed intelligent control panel, the power supply of the heaters can be adjusted automatically to ensure the stability of temperature at the entrance of the test sec- tion. The whole external surface of the wind tunnel is covered with a layer of foil-backed 150 mm glass wool to prevent heat loss dur- ing the experiment and make the temperature control much easier. Fig. 1. Scheme of experimental facility setting up. H. Wei et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 140 (2019) 379–398 381

[PAGE 4] As a result, the ﬂuctuation of the mainstream temperature during the experiment could be kept less than 0.1 K which is monitored by a resistance temperature detector (RTD) at the entrance of the test section. Before entering the test section, the mainstream hot air passes through multiple layers of damping screens to obtain uni- form temperature and velocity distributions. The secondary ﬂow channel is consists of coolant air intake, ﬁlter, blower, oriﬁce ﬂow-meter, ﬂow straighteners and coolant plenum. The secondary stream air is drawn into the air intake by a 37KW Roots blower and ﬁltered. It then passes through a calibrated oriﬁce ﬂow-meter, enters into the plenum, and ﬁnally ejects through the fan-shaped holes to form a cooling ﬁlm on the hot side surface of the test plate. The ﬂow straighteners, including honeycomb and screens, are placed at the entrance of the plenum to ensure a uniform distribution of velocity. A RTD is mounted at the entrance of the ple- num to monitor the temperature of secondary ﬂow. The test section consists of a mainstream channel (500 mm  500 mm in cross section, 2000 mm in length) and a coolant plenum (300 mm  300 mm in cross section, 1000 mm in length), which are both built from plexiglass with a thickness of 15 mm and connected by a frame structure to allow easy assembly of test plate at the junction as shown in Fig. 1. A breather slot is located around the perimeter at the downstream end of the main- stream channel so that the internal pressure of the mainstream channel does not increase as the air heats up and secondary air ﬂows in [32]. The temperature distribution at the hot-side surface of the test plate is measured utilizing TLC technique. The thermal image of TLC is captured by a CCD video camera, which is situated in front of the test section with a vertical viewing angle. A pair of 70 W LED lamps is ﬁxed on both sides of the camera at suitable positions where the reﬂections of direct light from the test section against the camera have been avoided. 2.2. Test plate The test plates are made of polyether-ether-ketone (PEEK), with a very low thermal conductivity (<0.2 W/(mK)), so that the con- vective heat transfer effect on the opposite surface of the effusion plate as well as the conduction effect in the perforated plate are very weak to be ignorable [33]. Fig. 2 shows a top view of the test plate, while the corresponding deﬁnitions of the geometric param- eters, including hole inclination angle (a), lateral expansion angle (b), hole entrance diameter (D), hole exit width (W) and the ﬁlm cooling plate thickness (H) can be found in Fig. 3. See Fig. 2, 145 fan-shaped holes are distributed in 10 rows, of 14 or 15 holes in each row, and arranged in a staggered pattern. The diameter of the hole entrance (D) is kept at 3 mm, and the lateral width of the hole exit is constrained to a constant as W = 3D. The test plate has a constant thickness of 10D/3. The span-wise spacing of the holes is set as Y = 6.5D, which is close to but slightly larger than 2 W, seeking an effectively full coverage of cooling ﬁlm. Note that too wide Y may prevent the coalescence of the coolant jets and therefore decrease the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness [34]. As for the stream-wise spacing of the holes, X, over-cooling may occur for - X  6D at high blowing ratios, while, on the other hand, too lar- ge X may cause the lake of interaction between the separate cooling jets [35]. Therefore, in the present study, X is kept at 8.5D. As shown in Fig. 3, the coordinates x, y and z are taken, respec- tively, to be measured along the stream-wise, span-wise and normal directionswith x-origin deﬁned at the downstream-most edge of the hole exit in the ﬁrst row and y-origin at the centreline of the hole. 2.3. Measurement and parameter deﬁnition The detailed geometric parameters of the test models and the corresponding ﬂow conditions considered in the present experi- (a) Test plate (b) Locally enlarged view Fig. 2. The test plate from top view. Fig. 3. Deﬁnitions of geometrical parameters. 382 H. Wei et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 140 (2019) 379–398

[PAGE 5] ments can be found in Table 1. In the table, BR represents the blow- ing ratio, which can be deﬁned as BR ¼ qcuc q1u1 ¼ 4 _mc=pD2N q1u1 ð1Þ where qc and q1 are the density of secondary ﬂow and mainstream, respectively; uc and u1 are the ﬂow velocity of secondary ﬂow and mainstream, respectively; _mc is the total mass ﬂow rate of sec- ondary ﬂow; N represents the total number of the effusion holes. The cylindrical holes are treated as the speciﬁc fan-shaped holes with a 0 expansion angle and therefore an exit diameter of D. The adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness can be deﬁned as g ¼ T1  Tw T1  Tc ð2Þ where Tw is the temperature on the adiabatic wall. T1 and Tc are the temperature of the mainstream and the coolant, respectively. Then, the laterally averaged adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness g can be given by gðxÞ ¼ R Y 0 gðx; yÞdy Y ð3Þ Black paint backed TLC (R30C20W, Hallcrest), which has been calibrated, is sprayed on the hot-side surface of the test plate for the measurement of temperature distribution (Tw). Here, the black paint is used to ensure a good contrast in the colors perceived from the crystal surface. Tc and T1 are set as around 303.15 K and 323.15 K , respectively, and changed slightly for different test runs to ensure that the TLC is active over the whole test surface. Both Tc and T1 are monitored by Pt100 RTDs. The velocity of the main- stream (u1) is measured by using a Pitot-static tube, while the mass ﬂow rate of secondary ﬂow ( _mc) is measured with an oriﬁce ﬂow-meter. A Keysight 34980A acquisition system with 34921A channel armature multiplexer and 34921T terminal block is used to acquire data. The discharge coefﬁcient Cd is deﬁned as the ratio of actual mass ﬂow rate, _mc, to the theoretical mass ﬂow rate, _mideal, through the holes, i.e. Cd ¼ _mc _mideal ð4Þ where _mc is measured by the oriﬁce ﬂow-meter. _mideal is calculated assuming an isentropic one-dimensional expansion from the total pressure in the coolant plenum Pt;c to the static pressure in the mainstream Ps;1, i.e. _mideal ¼ APt;c Ps;1 Pt;c  ðjþ1Þ=2j ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2j ðj  1ÞRTt;c   Pt;c Ps;1  ðj1Þ=j  1 " # v u u t ð5Þ where A ¼ pD2 4   N is the total area of the hole entrances, j is the ratio of air speciﬁc heats. Tt;c is the total temperature in the coolant plenum. Four pressure taps are located on the walls of the coolant ple- num for the measurement of static pressure upstream the hole entrances. Note that the cross-section area of the plenum is much larger than that of cooling hole entrances, the Mach number in the plenum approximates zero. Thus, the measured static pressure is basically the same as the total pressure there and denotes as Pt;c. Similarly, the measured temperature at the plenum, i.e. Tc, is used as Tt;c in Eq.(5). The static pressure, Ps;1, is measured using pres- sure taps at 20D downstream of the last row of effusion holes. 2.4. Experimental uncertainly anlysis In the experiments, the uncertainty of temperatures measured with the RTDs are ±0.15 K. While, the uncertainty of temperature measured with the thermo-chromic liquid crystal (TLC) is ±0.5 K. The total experimental uncertainties are determined using the method described by Moffat [36]. For an experimental result, H, calculated from several indepen- dent variables, H = H(X1,X2,X3,. . .XN), the total uncertainty from this result is given by dH H ¼ X N i¼1 @H @Xi dXi H  2 " #1=2  100% ð6Þ where dXi is the uncertainty of independent variable Xi. Table 2 shows the relative uncertainties of the independent variables related to the adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness g. Substituting the relevant parameters into Eq. (6) leads to the relative uncertainties of g from 5.8% at g ¼ 0:3 to 3.5% at g ¼ 0:5. In addition, the mass ﬂow rate measured with the oriﬁce ﬂow- meter has an uncertainty of ±0.1% F.S. while the mainstream veloc- ity uncertainty is ±1.0%. Considering the range of ﬂow parameters in the experiments, the maximum uncertainty of the blowing ratio is 4%. The uncertainty of the discharge coefﬁcient is relatively lar- ger at a lower pressure ratio, when _mideal approximates 0. When Pt;c=Ps;1 > 1:01, the uncertainty of the discharge coefﬁcient is less than 7%. 3. Film cooling efﬁciency Figs. 4–9 show the local distribution of the adiabatic ﬁlm cool- ing effectiveness, g, on the hot-side surface of the test plate, while the corresponding laterally averaged values g are plotted and com- pared in Fig. 10. For all of the cases, the cooling effectiveness increases in the stream-wise direction due to the accumulation of coolant ejected from multi-row of holes. Table 1 Experimental parameters. D (mm) H (mm) W (mm) X/D Y/D a() b() BR 3 10 9 8.5 6.5 20 0 0.5–7.5 (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 4.5, 5.5, 6.5, 7.5) 10 13 25 10 13 30 10 Table 2 Experimental uncertainty. Parameters (Xi) Relative uncertainty Mainstream temperature (T1) ±0.5% Secondary stream temperature (Tc) ±0.5% Wall temperature (Tw) ±1.67% H. Wei et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 140 (2019) 379–398 383

[PAGE 6] 3.1. Inﬂunece of blowing ratio For the cylindrical holes, with the increase of BR, the coolant tends to blow-off from the hot-side surface due to the kidney vor- tex [5], reducing the local ﬁlm cooling performance. When a ¼ 20, it can be seen from Fig. 4 that the coolant begins to blow-off at about BR = 0.5. Meanwhile, with the increasing BR, the mainstream temperature in the near wall region decreases sig- niﬁcantly due to the mixing with the blow-off coolant, improving downstream cooling performance. As a result, the stream-wise gra- dient of g increases with BR, as shown in Fig. 10(a). For the fan-shaped holes, with the raise of blowing ratio BR, the evolution of the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness normally experiences three stages, as shown in Figs. 5–9. At the ﬁrst stage, the coolant does not blow-off so that the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness increases with BR. Then, at the second stage, with the further increase of BR, high velocity part of the coolant penetrates into the main- stream reducing the local cooling performance, while the other part with lower speed can still attach on the hot side surface enhancing the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness. As a result, the develop- ment tendency of ﬁlm cooling performance at this stage depends on the competition between the above two factors. Finally, at the (a) BR=0.5 (b) BR=1.0 (c) BR=1.5 (d) BR=2.5 (e) BR=3.5 (f) BR=4.5 (g) BR=5.5 (h) BR=6.5 (i) BR=7.5 Fig. 4. Distribution of adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness (a ¼ 20; b ¼ 0). (a) BR=0.5 (b) BR=1.0 (c) BR=1.5 (d) BR=2.5 (e) BR=3.5 (f) BR=4.5 (g) BR=5.5 (h) BR=6.5 (i) BR=7.5 Fig. 5. Distribution of adiabatic ﬁlm cooling effectiveness (a ¼ 20; b ¼ 10). 384 H. Wei et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 140 (2019) 379–398