[PAGE 1] Probing Silicon Carbide with Phase-Modulated Femtosecond Laser Pulses: Insights into Multiphoton Photocurrent Ahsan Ali1,2, Chuanliang Wang1,2, Jinyang Cai1,2, and Khadga Jung Karki1,2,3* 1 Department of Physics, Guangdong Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Shantou 515063 Guangdong, China; 2Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Materials and Technologies for Energy Conversion, Guangdong Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Shantou 515063 Guangdong, China;3Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 32000, Israel *Correspondence: khadga.karki@gtiit.edu.cn Abstract Wide bandgap semiconductors are widely used in photonic technologies due to their advantageous features, such as large optical bandgap, low losses, and fast operational speeds. Silicon carbide is a prototypical wide bandgap semiconductor with high optical nonlinearities, large electron transport, and a high breakdown threshold. Integration of silicon carbide in nonlinear photonics requires a systematic analysis of the multiphoton contribution to the device functionality. Here, multiphoton photocurrent in a silicon carbide photodetector is investigated using phase-modulated femtosecond pulses. Multiphoton absorption is quantified using a 1030 nm phase-modulated pulsed laser. Our measurements show that although the bandgap is less than the energy of three photons, only four-photon absorption has a significant contribution to the photocurrent. We interpret the four-photon absorption as a direct transition from the valance to the conduction band at the Γ point. More importantly, silicon carbide withstands higher excitation intensities compared to other wide bandgap semiconductors making it an ideal system for high-power nonlinear applications. Keywords: Silicon carbide, Nonlinear response, Intensity modulation, Multiphoton absorption,

[PAGE 2] Introduction Development in optoelectronics has a tremendous impact on technologies we use in daily life as well as in specialized equipment1,2. Devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, and solar cells have become indispensable3–5. In optoelectronics, photons are regarded as a primary energy source and carriers of information. Characteristics like high-speed transmission, broadband response, and low propagation losses are essential for applications in telecommunication, lasers, medical imaging, quantum computing, and astronomy6. Advanced photo-integrated circuits (PICs) with the desired scalability require suitable material platforms that are efficient in photonic confinement and stable electronic structure7,8. Wide bandgap semiconductors such as gallium composites with nitrides, phosphides, and chalcogenides are the common materials integrated to reduce losses with enhanced efficacy9–14. In this category, silicon carbide (SiC) is a comparatively new but promising candidate due to its physical and optical properties15–17. Optically, it provides a wide transparent window, high refractive index, and nonlinearities, while physically, it has high thermal conductivity, electron saturation velocity, and breakdown electric field. It is a potential candidate to displace Silicon (Si) in high-power and high-frequency applications18,19. Similarly, SiC has useful nonlinear optical properties20,21, such as harmonic generation, phase modulation22, four-wave mixing, and multiphoton absorption (MPA)23,24, which are crucial for optoelectronic devices25,26. MPA is fundamental to understanding wide bandgap material-based devices' ultrafast intrinsic processes24. These processes are observed when semiconductors are excited by ultrashort pulses of laser with intensities in the range of 106 −1012 W/cm2 (MW/cm2 to TW/cm2) such that the probability of multiple photons interacting with the system simultaneously is significant. The order of multiphoton absorption depends on the material's electronic structure. For example, it has been found that one, two, and three-photon absorptions contribute to photocurrent in gallium phosphide (GaP)-based photodetector while only three-photon absorption contributes in indium gallium nitride (InGaN) photodetectors27.

[PAGE 3] Similar to GaP, SiC is an indirect bandgap semiconductor with a wider bandgap. Importantly, SiC is more stable to heat and radiation suggesting it could be a better material for applications in nonlinear optoelectronics. Anticipating its wider use in the near future, we have investigated multiphoton photocurrent in 4H-SiC photodetector using a highly sensitive technique based on phase-modulation of a pair femtosecond pulses with a central wavelength at 1030 nm (photon energy of 1.2 eV). The bandgap of 4H-SiC is 3.26 eV, which is less than three times the photon energy in our measurements. Just based on the bandgap, one expects a three-photon photocurrent. However, only a four-photon photocurrent is observed in SiC at the excitation intensities of 70 to 200 GW/cm2. These results differ significantly from GaP. We discuss the reason why three-photon absorption is absent in SiC and its implications in nonlinear optoelectronics. Materials and Methods A Mach Zehnder interferometer-based experimental setup is used to produce intensity-modulated femtosecond beams28–30; the schematic is shown in Fig 1(a). The laser used in this experiment is the Impulse fiber laser from Clark-MXR, Inc., with a wavelength of 1030 nm (1.2 eV photon energy), a pulse width of 300 fs, and a repetition rate of 0.2–25 MHz. A beam splitter divides the single beam into two, passing through the interferometer's arms separately. The carrier frequency υ of each beam is shifted independently using acousto-optic frequency shifters (AOFS) to υ1 = υ + p1 and υ2 = υ + p2, where p1 and p2 correspond to acoustic frequencies. The two beams of different frequencies are aligned carefully and combined at the output to produce a beam whose intensity modulates at the resultant frequency of Δυ = p2-p1. The optimal output shows complete interference between two phase-modulated beams originating from the same source. The expression for the output beam is given as I(t) ∝I0 (1 + cos (2π∆υt)), (1) where I(t) is the time-dependent intensity, and I0 is the amplitude. The output of the interferometer is a train of intensity modulated femtosecond pulses as shown in Fig 1(b). The modulation frequency Δυ is set to 1kHz, which is substantially smaller than the bandwidth of the photodetector. A parabolic mirror with a focal length of 33 mm is used to focus the beam onto the SiC photodetector (from GaNo Optoelectronics Inc.). The focus spot size is ̴ 20μm. The focus spot can be visually identified as the spot with green emission from the second harmonic generation (SHG)

[PAGE 4] (see Fig. 1(c)). A preamplifier is used for current-to-voltage conversion, after which the voltage signal is digitized by a 24-bit data acquisition card at a rate of 192,000 samples per second. The SHG emission is also detected using an avalanche photodiode to further characterize the nonlinear response. Results and Discussion A linear system when perturbed by a sinusoidal stimulus has a response at the same frequency as the perturbing stimulus. Thus, in the case of a photodetector that can be excited by single-photon absorption, one expects photocurrent to modulate at Δυ. We have used a Si photodetector as a reference to check the fidelity of linear response in our setup. The bandgap of Si (1.12 eV) is less than the photon energy at 1030 nm. As expected, the photocurrent response of Si photodiode presented in Fig 1(d) shows response only at Δυ = 1 kHz indicating that the optical setup itself does not impart nonlinearities. Any spurious signals at harmonics of Δυ are less than two orders of magnitude smaller. If different orders of multiphoton absorptions contribute to photocurrent, the measured signal as a function of intensity is generally given by: S ∝α ∙I + β ∙I2 + γ ∙I3 + χ · I4 …, (2) where the coefficients are related to the absorption cross-sections of different orders of interactions. In particular, α, β, γ, and χ represent the one-photon (1PA), two-photon (2PA), three-photon (3PA), and four-photon (4PA) absorption cross-sections, respectively. In Eq. (2), we have only considered perturbative description of light-matter interaction and neglected any nonperturbative contributions. Usually, nonperturbative interactions become important at intensities >1013 Wcm-2, which is about two order of magnitude larger than the intensities we have used in our measurements. Fig 1(e) shows the Fourier transforms of photocurrent signals from the SiC photodetector at different excitation intensities. Distinct modulations are observed at the frequencies Δυ, 2Δυ, 3Δυ, and 4Δυ in the measurements done with excitation intensities in the range of 7 × 1010 W cm-2 to 1.99 ×1011 W cm-2. The highest modulation frequency observed in the signal is, 4Δυ, which indicates that contribution from 4PA is detectable at the most in our measurements. It has been

[PAGE 5] shown that in some systems, different orders of multiphoton absorption can contribute simultaneously27,31,32. Is it also the case in SiC? Figure 1. (a) Schematic of experimental design for the modulation of intensity at a single frequency by splitting two beams from the same source (central wavelength 1030 nm) using a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. (b) An illustration of a train of intensity-modulated femtosecond pulses with a modulation frequency of 1kHz. (c) A microscopic image of SiC photodetector with a visible spot of the second harmonic at 515 nm. (d) Response signals of Si photodetector at different powers showing linearity of the system. (e) Nonlinear photocurrent signals from SiC photodetector at different powers, inset shows the peaks at 1,2,3 and 4 kHz. To answer the question, we analyze the intensity dependence of the signals modulated at Δυ, 2Δυ, 3Δυ, and 4Δυ. The measured values of the signals are shown in the log-log plot in Fig 2(a). The linear fits of the data have the slopes of 4.0 ± 0.1, 4.0 ± 0.1, 4.3 ± 0.3, 4.4±0.3 for the signals at the frequencies Δυ, 2Δυ, 3Δυ, and 4Δυ, respectively. The quartic dependence of the signals on the intensity at all modulation frequencies indicates that the dominant contribution to photocurrent is from 4PA, while lower order multiphoton absorption processes are negligible. This also implies that, unlike in GaP27, linear absorption by sub-bandgap traps and defects do not contribute to photocurrent in SiC when excited at 1030 nm. Measurement at a particular spectral window, aser eam plitter A irror elay tage i hotodetector eference A irror T, = 1 T = 1kHz Train of intensity modulated femtosecond pulses a) b) c) d) e) cm cm 1 1 odulation frequency Hz) Amplitude arb. unit) odulation frequency Hz) 1 econd Harmonic eneration

[PAGE 6] however, does not ascertain the absence of sub-bandgap absorptions. To test the if a semiconductor is suitable for applications in UV and multiphoton photodetection, it is important to check the photocurrent response at different spectral regions below the bandgap. Thus, we have carried out additional measurements at 515 nm using the second harmonic of 1030 nm. Here, photocurrent is modulated only at Δυ and Δυ, which is expected for a A process. Intensity dependence of the signals are shown in Fig 3(a). Linear fits of the signals in the log-log plot have the slopes of 2.0 ± 0.1 for Δυ and 1.9 ± .1 for 2Δυ, confirming the prevalence of A. Notably, the contribution from 1PA is not present, providing further evidence to the lack of photocurrent due to sub-bandgap absorptions. These findings show that the SiC devices we have measured are ideal for solar blind detection of UV photons and MPA. Figure 2. (a) Intensity dependence of photocurrent signals modulated at the frequencies Δυ, Δυ, 3Δυ, and Δυ, and (b) SHG modulated at the frequencies Δυ, Δυ from the SiC photodetector. Apart from MPA, SiC has a strong 𝜒2 nonlinearity due to its non-centrosymmetric crystal structure. As a result, it is also suitable for efficient second harmonic generation (SHG). Fig 2(b) shows the intensity dependence of back scattered SHG from SiC. The slopes of the signals at the modulation frequencies of Δυ and Δυ in the log-log plot are 2.1 ± 0.1 and 2.2 ± 0.1, respectively, which are close to the values expected for second order nonlinear signal. Out of the two signals, the signal at 2Δυ can be used to approximately measure the intensity autocorrelation (see Appendix for the derivation). Similarly, the photocurrent signal at 4Δυ gives higher-order correlation function. The