[PAGE 1] Laser writing and spin control of near infrared emitters in silicon carbide Zhi-He Hao,† Zhen-Xuan He,† Jovan Maksimovic,∥Tomas Katkus,∥Jin-Shi Xu,∗,† Saulius Juodkazis,∥Chuan-Feng Li,∗,† Guang-Can Guo,† and Stefania Castelletto∗,# †CAS Key Laboratory of Quantum Information, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China ‡ Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Quantum Network, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China. ¶CAS Center For Excellence in Quantum Information and Quantum Physics,University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China §Hefei National Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230088, China ∥Optical Sciences Center and ARC Training Centre in Surface Engineering for Advanced Materials (SEAM), Swinburne University of Technology, John Street, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia. ⊥Laser Research Center, Physics Faculty, Vilnius University, Saul˙etekio Ave. 10, 10223 Vilnius, Lithuania #School of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria 3001, Australia. E-mail: jsxu@ustc.edu.cn; cfli@ustc.edu.cn; stefania.castelletto@rmit.edu.au Abstract 1 arXiv:2411.18868v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 28 Nov 2024

[PAGE 2] Near infrared emission in silicon carbide is relevant for quantum technology specif- ically single photon emission and spin qubits for integrated quantum photonics, quan- tum communication and quantum sensing. In this paper we study the fluorescence emission of direct femtosecond laser written array of color centres in silicon carbide followed by thermal annealing. We show that in high energy laser writing pulses re- gions a near telecom O-band ensemble fluorescence emission is observed after thermal annealing and it is tentatively attributed to the nitrogen vacancy centre in silicon car- bide. Further in the low energy laser irradiation spots after annealing, we fabricated few divacancy, PL5 and PL6 types and demonstrate their optical spin read-out, and coherent spin manipulation (Rabi and Ramsey oscillations and spin echo). We show that direct laser writing and thermal annealing can yield bright near telecom emission and preserve the spin coherence time of divacancy at room temperature. Introduction Silicon Carbide (SiC) is a third generation semiconductor used in the high-power electronic industry, for high temperature1 and high-frequency applications. In its more commonly de- ployed hexagonal polytype (4H-SiC), it is currently commercially available in eight inches wafer scale with the desired intrinsic epilayers purity, and n and p-type doping control. SiC is a CMOS compatible semiconductor with linear and nonlinear optical properties, ideal for in- tegrated photonic applications.2–4 Recent studies have demonstrated that SiC paramagnetic color centres electron spin can serve as qubit,5 can be initialized, read out in a single shot and coherently controlled with coherence time up to five second.6 A quantum coherent spin- photon interface7–9 can be created based on SiC spin selective optical transitions to achieve spin-photon entanglement10 and enable connection between the quantum memory of the solid-state qubit, coupled nuclear spins,11 and the flying qubit encoded into single photon. These achievements have established SiC as a platform for quantum communication, quan- tum computing architectures and quantum sensing. The integration of these spin-photon 2

[PAGE 3] qubits in conventional devices or tailored devices can be pursued in this semiconductor to scale quantum technologies engineering into devices with enhanced sensitivities. Specifically, relevant qubits in SiC have been associated to spin S=1 defects, such as the divacancy centres (VSiV0 C),6,12–18 consisting of neighboring C and Si vacancies. There are several emissions in 4H-SiC that are attributed to divacancies as determined by their photoluminescence (PL), optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) and spin control studies, known as PL1- PL7, with PL1 (1132 nm), PL2 (1131 nm), and PL6 (1038 nm) along the c-axis, PL3 (1108 nm), PL4 (1078 nm), PL5 (1043 nm), and PL7 (unknown PL) along (0001) basal plane.12,14 Details of the properties of divacancies in bulk 4H-SiC and their applications for quantum sensing of magnetic field and temperature were recently reviewed.19 Divancacies are gener- ated by thermal annealing from the silicon monovacancy (V− Si) in 4H-SiC,20,21 which is also an excellent spin-photon interface with S=3/2 in the spectral region of 920 nm. Selection from one to another emitter is primarily achieved using thermal annealing, as for instance the V− Si anneals out above 600◦C and and divacancy emerges at 900 ◦C annealing. A telecom O-band emission in 4H-SiC is attributed to the nitrogen vacancy (NCV− Si) centres.22–26 The (NCV− Si) in 4H-SiC also possess four ZPLs depending on the location in the crystal, namely 1241 nm (kk) and 1223.3 nm (hh) on-axis and 1180 nm (kh) and 1242 nm (hk) off-axis.26 NCV− Si is created after nitrogen ions implantation in intrinsic 4H-SiC epilayers and thermal annealing at around 1050◦C26 or it can be created in ensemble by hydrogen ions implan- tation in N-doped 4H-SiC.25,27 Room temperature spin control of nitrogen ions implanted NCV− Si with coherence time of 17.1 µs and single photon emission have been demonstrated at room temperature.28 Currently the fabrication of these color centres is based on electron irradiation, ions implantation and focused ions beams.4,29 Helium focused ions beam (FIB) can be used to fabricate these emitters in array without masks,30 which is very desirable for placing the qubits into photonic nanostructures, however the control of their formation at depth is limited to 179 nm beneath the surface due to the low energy of the FIB. This close to the 3

[PAGE 4] surface fabrication is also limiting the spin coherence time of the qubits31 and ultimately can also affect their spectral photostability. Another approach to fabricate these emitters deeper in the material is based on focused protons micro-beam,32,33 which is however more suitable for ensemble of spins creation. Generally ions implantation produces residual damage that can be detrimental for the preservation of spin coherence of the spin-qubits. Direct laser fabrication is another maskless approach to create color centres that can have a better control for deeper color centres fabrication. Laser writing has been used to create the V− Si in 4H-SiC at the single defect level34 using femtosecond laser single pulses and by using a nanosecond laser writing and annealing, the V− Si has been created directly in photonic crystal cavity.35 Ensemble of V− Si and VSiV0 C were also demonstrated using femtosecond laser writing.36–38 It has been found that the thermal annealing for VSiV0 C in femtosecond laser written samples, yields higher concentration of colour centers at lower annealing temperature of 800◦C compared to electrons and ions irradiated samples. Due to the low PL emission of the laser fabricated V− Si, attributed to quenching effects due to carbon vacancies, only the ODMR was demonstrated so far for the laser fabricated color centres in SiC. Therefore it is currently unknown if the laser fabrication affects these color centres spin coherence properties. In this paper we directly fabricate large ensemble of telecom O-band photo-emission tentatively associated to the NCV− Si centre and small ensemble of few divancancies in 4H- SiC. We also show the spin manipulation of the laser written ensemble divacancies, providing relevant information about the preservation of their spin coherence after laser fabrication. Material and Methods Laser Inscription A solid state Yb:KGW laser (Pharos, Light Conversion, Ltd., Vilnius, Lithuania) at 515 nm, 230 fs duration, and repetition rate of 200 kHz was used as described in ref.,37 as 4

[PAGE 5] previously utilised to create ensemble of V− Si. The laser writing was applied to commercial highly N-doped (1×1019 cm−3) 4H-SiC substrate purchased from SiCrysta and large area array with dots were written with energy per pulse in each line from 2 nJ/pulse to 445 nJ/pulse at 2 and 4 µm depths. The dots were written 5 µm apart. The writing objective lens has a 100 × magnification and numerical aperture NA= 0.90 with a working distance of 1.3 mm. Before laser writing, the SiC sample was cleaned with a Piranha solution to remove organic contaminants, and then annealed in an Argon atmosphere at 1000 C for 1 h to reduce the as-grown V− Si. After laser writing the sample was cleaned with a Piranha solution, and then imaged and the written area spectroscopy performed at room temperature (RT). Subsequently, the sample was annealed at 900 ◦C for 30 minutes in Argon atmosphere. RT and low temperature imaging and spectroscopy were performed on the annealed sample. Confocal imaging, spectroscopy and lifetime measurements For imaging the high energy laser written locations (450 nJ to 22 nJ) a home-built scanning fluorescence confocal system equipped with InGaAs single photon counting modules from IDQuantiue (IDQ230) with an approximately 15 % quantum efficiency and ≈2000 counts/s dark counts was used. The excitation laser was a CW 976 nm diode, and the fluorescence was detected after a dichroic mirror at 980 nm (Di02-R980-25x36) and a long bandpass filter at 1000 nm (Thorlabs, FELH1000). The confocal can operate at RT and at cryogenic tem- perature as it is equipped with a Montana cryo-station, that can reach 5 K. The confocal was also connected with a Princeton Spectrometer equipped with a PyLoN-IR camera operating at liquid nitrogen temperature used to measure the PL from the laser written array. For room temperature operation an Olympus dry objective LCPLN-IR (100×, 0.85 NA) was used and for cryogenic operation an dry IR Olympus objective (60×, 0.65 NA) was used with longer focal distance. The objectives were mounted on a PI XYZ computer-controlled stage with an XYZ closed-loop positioner with a 200 µm travel distance in each direction and step size resolution of 1 nm. The samples were mounted on an XYZ manual stage 5

[PAGE 6] for room temperature imaging or on an attocube XYZ stage inside the cryostat. Lifetime measurements were performed with a variable wavelength supercontinuum NKT Photonics Fianium WhiteLase pulsed laser at 800 nm and 40 MHz repetition rate. A time correlator card (PicoQuant GmbH, Berlin Germany TimeHarp 260) was used to obtain time-resolved PL decay traces. Spin manipulation To probe the ODMR and spin coherence of divacancy in correspondence to the low energy laser inscriptions (2-13 nJ) a home-built scanning confocal microscope with an objective with an NA of 0.85 (Olympus, LCPLN-R, 100X) was used. In all of the optical measurements, a 914-nm CW laser, filtered by a shortpass filter (Thorlabs, FESH950), was used to excite those colour centres. A dichroic beamsplitter (Semrock, Di02-R980-2536) was then used to separate the laser and fluorescence signals. For various measurements at room temperature, the SiC sample was mounted on a closed cycle three-axis piezoelectric stage (PI, E-727.3SD). The fluorescence signals filtered by a 1000-nm longpass filter (Thorlabs, FELH1000) were coupled to a single-mode fibre and then guided to a superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD, PHOTEC) with an approximately 85% quantum efficiency. The number of photons was recorded by a counter (NI, USB-6341). For the ODMR, Rabi, Ramsey and spin echo measurements, the microwave sequences were generated using a synthesized signal generator (Mini-Circuits, SSG-6000 RC) and then gated by a switch (Mini-Circuits, ZASWA- 2-50DR+). After amplification (Mini-Circuits, ZHL-25W-272+), the microwave signals were fed to a 20-µm-wide copper wire above the surface of the 4H-SiC sample. The exciting 914- nm CW laser was modulated using an acousto-optic modulator. The timing sequence of the electrical signals for manipulating and synchronizing the laser, microwave and counter was generated using a pulse generator (SpinCore, PBESR-PRO500). 6