[PAGE 1] Engineering Failure Analysis 170 (2025) 109321 Available online 16 January 2025 1350-6307/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. Thermo-mechanical loads and creep life assessment for coated turbine blades considering the influence of cooling hole blockage Linchuan Liu , Xueling Fan *, Zhaohui Chu , Jingjing Yang Xi’an Key Laboratory of Extreme Environmental Serviceability and Protection Technologies, School of Aerospace Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Turbine blade Cooling hole blockage Thermo-mechanical loads Larson-Miller parameter method Creep life Blockage damage coefficient A B S T R A C T Cooling hole blockage significantly impacts the service life of coated high-pressure turbine blades in aero-engines. In this study, two blockage structures reflecting the actual blockage morphology were designed. The thermo-mechanical loads of blades with and without blockage were analyzed using the shell conduction method and the Chaboche constitutive model. Combined with creep life assessment through the Larson-Miller parameter method, the fundamental reasons for the impact of blockage on the blade creep life were revealed. A creep life correction method based on the blockage damage coefficient was established to quantify the reduction in blade life reserve caused by blockage. The results indicate that blockage alters the flow field and heat transfer characteristics, decreasing cooling efficiency across most areas of the blade surface and ultimately reducing creep life. Under the specific blockage condition in this study, the critical area of the blade is located at the edge of the cooling hole near the blade root along the leading edge, with the creep life decreasing by 18.7 % and the blockage damage coefficient of 81.3 %. The research has significant scientific value for the life extension design and maintenance strategy of turbine blades. 1. Introduction In order to improve aero-engines performance, a notable upward trend in turbine inlet temperature has emerged. Currently, advanced turbine inlet temperatures can reach 2000 K, far exceeding the limit temperature that the substrate can withstand [1–3]. Under extreme environments, turbine blades are threatened by multiple damage mechanisms [4–9], especially creep rupture due to centrifugal force and thermal exposure [10,11], resulting in the equivalent operating hour of the blade being just a few dozen or even a few hours [12]. To prolong the service life of blades, thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) and film cooling technology are employed to provide excellent protection against high temperature and oxidation [3,13]. However, the limited space of the cooling holes inevitably results in blockage during coating spraying and long-term operation [14,15]. The blockage significantly affects the coolant flow conditions and the heat transfer performance, reducing blade cooling efficiency and creep life [16,17]. Although the TBCs-film cooling systems have been extensively studied [18,19], relatively less attention has been paid to the cooling hole blockage. Accurately calculating the thermo-mechanical loads on blades under blockage conditions and revealing the influence of blockage characteristics on blade creep life are vital for ensuring the long-term operation of turbines [20–22]. The recent studies on blade blockage have revolved around the composition and structure of blockage materials [23–25], the * Corresponding author. E-mail address: fanxueling@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (X. Fan). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Engineering Failure Analysis journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engfailanal https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2025.109321 Received 3 December 2024; Received in revised form 12 January 2025; Accepted 15 January 2025

[PAGE 2] Engineering Failure Analysis 170 (2025) 109321 2 particle deposition mechanisms [26,27], and the aerodynamic performance under blockage conditions [28–34]. Wang et al. [28] and Tian et al. [29] investigated the influence of various blockage structures, including spherical, hemispherical, and tetrahedral shapes, on flat plate cooling efficiency. Huang et al. [30] simulated the blockage using a specialized pyramid-shaped element, considering the impact of blockage orientation and ratio. Recognizing the limitations of idealized simplified structures in reflecting blade load characteristics under actual blockage conditions, Bogard et al. [24] initially employed a semi-arc structure to simulate actual blockage morphology. Subsequently, a series of heat and mass transfer studies were conducted based on this model [15,25,31]. However, the exploration of mechanical loads and creep life of the TBCs-film cooling system under blockage conditions is absent in the above studies. Moreover, their exclusive focus on single or single-row holes limits the breadth of the research, making it challenging to reveal the impact of blockage on the creep life of full-sized blades. Two common approaches are used to investigate the impact of blockage on blade life: data-driven methods and physical model- based methods. Ogiriki et al. [16] developed a relationship model between blockage and blade life using field data, introducing a temperature-dependent creep coefficient to account for the effects of performance degradation on life. Similarly, Liu et al. [35,36] used a machine learning approach based on dynamic engine operation covariate data to characterize the impact of blockage on blade temperature and life. However, data-driven methods rely on large amounts of experimental data, which are difficult to obtain and may lack accuracy. Additionally, due to their lack of explanations for physical phenomena, these methods struggle to reveal the funda- mental causes of blockage effects on blade life. Establishing realistic blockage structures, combined with appropriate creep life models, can more effectively reveal the damage mechanisms associated with blockage. Poursaeidi et al. [12] employed a combination of simulation and experimental methods to investigate the impact of blockage structures on the life of blades at different locations. However, their research lacked theoretical analysis and focused primarily on the internal cooling channels. Brian et al. [37] utilized thermal imaging technology to assess the effect of cooling hole blockage on blade cooling efficiency, comparing the results to engine conditions to evaluate blade life. Never- theless, this approach remains fundamentally an empirical model based on similarity criteria and cannot determine the life distribution of the blades. In summary, current research on the load characteristics and creep life of full-scale blades under blockage conditions is very limited. Revealing the impact of blockage on loads and creep life, as well as identifying the critical areas during blade operation, holds significant importance and engineering application value. In this study, the blockage morphology characteristics of the blade after service were first observed and quantified, and a full-scale blade model incorporating various characteristics of cooling hole blockage was established. Next, the thermo-mechanical loads of the coated blade were analyzed based on the shell conduction method and the Chaboche elastic–plastic constitutive model. Finally, the Larson-Miller parameter (LMP) method was employed to predict the creep life, and the blockage damage coefficient was calculated. This study revealed the impact of blockage on the thermo-mechanical loads and creep life of turbine blades and proposed a creep life correction method considering blockage to enhance the safety of the blades. 2. Methods 2.1. Temperature analysis method of coated blade The advanced engine coated turbine blade consists of a load-bearing substrate (Sub), a ceramic top-coat (TC), a metallic bond-coat (BC), and a thermally grown oxide (TGO) formed at the interface between TC and BC. The treatment of TBCs and cooling holes has always been a focal point in the load calculations for blades. Especially, the geometric complexity of full-hole blockage and cross-scale membrane-based structures poses significant challenges for modeling and thermo-mechanical load analysis of full-scale blades. In this study, the shell conduction method is employed to address the dramatic increase in mesh numbers across the coupled surfaces of cross- scale membrane-based structures, such as the Sub-TBCs system [38], enabling the possibility of damage analysis for full-scale coated blades. In this method, TBCs, composed of multiple thin membranes, are simplified into thermal resistance terms in the equations. Temperature loads are obtained by solving three-dimensional steady and transient heat conduction differential equations involving multiple materials and structures: ∇• (λi∇T) + ∑n i=1RiT = 0 (1) ∇• (λi∇T) + ∑n i=1RiT = ρici ∂T ∂t (2) Ri = li λi (3) where ∇• is the divergence operator, ∇is the gradient operator, T represents temperature, t represents time, λi, ρi, ci, Ri, and li denote the thermal conductivity, density, specific heat capacity, thermal resistance, and thickness of the i layer structure, respectively. During operation, there are three heat transfer processes of the blade: heat transfer in mainstream, internal coolant, and conduction within the blade structure [3]. The conjugate heat transfer (CHT) method is applied for heat transfer calculations between the fluid domains and the Sub. The interfaces between each domain are set as coupled surfaces for the physical quantities transfer. At each node on these coupled surfaces, temperature and heat flux satisfy the following continuity boundary conditions: L. Liu et al.

[PAGE 3] Engineering Failure Analysis 170 (2025) 109321 3 Tf = Ts (4) −λf ∂Tf ∂n = λs∂Ts ∂n (5) where Tf and Ts are the temperatures of the fluid and solid domains at the coupling surface, respectively, λf and λs are the thermal conductivities of the fluid and solid domains, respectively, and n represents the normal direction. The high environmental temperature necessitates the consideration of radiation heat transfer in numerical calculations. The discrete ordinate (DO) radiative model is employed to solve the radiative transfer equation [39]. By solving the equations of radiative transfer for a finite number of discrete solid angles related to a direction vector s→(x1,x2,x3), the model achieves the calculation of radiation energy. Assuming exposure to incident radiation from a blackbody environment, the emissivity of the fluid domain sur- rounding the system is set to 1. The emissivity of the BC and Sub is set to 0.8, and the ceramic TC is assumed to be a semi-transparent material [40]. 2.2. Creep life evaluation method of coated blade In the multitude of creep life prediction models, the LMP method [41] proposed by Larson and Miller is widely used [42–44] for its high accuracy and convenience. Shi et al. [10] emphasized the preference for the LMP method due to its simplicity and efficiency, following a comparison with other complex models. In this method, life and temperature are represented as compensating parameters and a functional relationship is established with equivalent stress to evaluate the rupture life of materials under multiaxial loading. The commonly used equation is as follows: TK(A + lgtcr) = P(σ) (6) where TK is the kelvin temperature, tcr is the creep rupture life, σ is the equivalent stress, P is the Larson-Miller parameter related to stress, and A is the material parameter. Based on relevant studies, the relationship between P and equivalent stress can be expressed as [45,46]: lgσ = a0 + a1P + a2P2 + ⋯+ anPn (7) P = lgtcr + bTK (8) where ai and b are material constants, which are fitted using creep experimental data under various conditions, as shown in Fig. 1 [45]. It is evident that P is represented as an implicit function in Eq. (7), and its numerical solution is calculated using the Newton- Raphson method: xn+1 = xn −f(xn) fʹ(xn) (9) where xn is the current approximation value, xn+1 is the next approximation value, updated from the current value, f(xn) and fʹ(xn) represent the value and the derivative of the creep life expression at xn, respectively. In this study, the temperature and mechanical loads at each node of the blade are first obtained through finite element analysis. The implicit function of P is then solved based on the node stress using Eq. (7). Finally, by combining the corresponding node temperature load, the creep life of the turbine blade is calculated using Eq. (8). Fig. 1. Creep test data of DD6 standard specimen and the results of parameter fitting [45]. L. Liu et al.

[PAGE 4] Engineering Failure Analysis 170 (2025) 109321 4 3. Finite element models and materials 3.1. Microscopic observation of blockage morphology In order to design and establish the geometric model of blockage, the morphology characteristics of all cooling hole blockages on the blade after testing are analyzed. The simplified geometric model of a certain type of high-pressure turbine blade in aero-engines is shown in Fig. 2, with a height of approximately 110 mm. The external contour and tenon of the blade are retained, and necessary cooling structures, such as main cooling holes, trailing edge slots, and internal cooling channels, are included to ensure the appli- cability of the model. Based on the actual dimensions, number, and distribution characteristics of the main cooling holes in the turbine blade, the six rows of simplified cooling holes are designed, and are designated as Rows 1 to 6. Macroscopic observations reveal that the cooling holes in rows 5 and 6 on the suction surface are almost free from blockage. The main reason may be that as the mainstream passes through the convex surface, the interaction of the centrifugal force and cross-stream pressure gradient causes the mainstream to move away from the backside of the blade. Furthermore, the high-momentum jets caused by the high-pressure gradient near the suction surface make it difficult for deposits to adhere within the cooling holes [3]. The leading edge and pressure surface of the blade exhibited more severe blockage, with typical top-view images shown in Fig. 3 (a). The blockage morphology exhibits a coupled relationship with the flow field and temperature field. Due to the nearly vertical incidence angle of the leading-edge cooling holes, the deposits exhibit a similar probability of attaching around the holes, resulting in a ring-shaped structure in the top view of the blockage. In contrast, the blockage on the pressure surface, influenced by the flow field, forms a crescent-shaped structure in the top view and adheres to the downstream side of the hole. The longitudinal cross-sectional micrographs of the cooling holes in Rows 1 to 4 are shown in Fig. 3(b). It can be observed that, except for deposit attachment, coating spraying also causes a certain degree of blockage. For the leading-edge, the blockage is distributed on both sides of the hole in the longitudinal cross-section and approximately forms a semi-arc structure. For the pressure surface, the blockage is distributed only on one side, presenting a combined shape with a triangle top and a semi-arc bottom. A comparison reveals that the cooling holes in Row 1, located at the leading edge of the blade, have fewer blockages compared to those on the pressure surface. This is because the high temperatures at the leading edge during operation exceed the melting point of the deposits, preventing them from solidifying and adhering. As the downstream temperature of the blade decreases and the proba- bility of particle adhesion on the pressure surface increases, the cooling holes in Rows 2, 3, and 4 exhibit increasingly higher degrees of blockage. This observation is consistent with the simulation results reported by Wakikuromaru et al. [26], showing an increasing blockage rate from the leading edge to the trailing edge. The blockage ratio (B) is commonly used to quantitatively characterize the degree of blockage in the cooling holes and is defined as [14]: B = Ablockage Aholes,exit = d D (10) where the Ablockage is the area of holes exit blocked part, the Aholes,exit is the area of common holes exit, the D is the hole diameter, and the d is the blockage thickness. The blockage ratio for each hole in Rows 1 to 4 is depicted in Fig. 4, with the average values of 0.098, 0.109, 0.145, and 0.215, respectively. 3.2. Geometrical model and the boundary conditions of the blade with blockage Based on the structural characteristics of different blockages described in Fig. 3(a) and (b), two schematic representations of the Fig. 2. The turbine blade geometrical model: (a) pressure surface; (b) suction surface. L. Liu et al.

[PAGE 5] Engineering Failure Analysis 170 (2025) 109321 5 blockage structures are established as depicted in Fig. 5. The blockages in the leading-edge cooling holes are built as ring-shaped structures in the Y-axis view, with a semi-arc shape in the longitudinal cross-section. The blockages in the cooling holes on the pressure surface are built as crescent-shaped structures in the Y-axis view, with a combination of triangle and semi-arc in the Fig. 3. Blockage structure graphs at different locations: (a) typical top views of the cooling hole at different positions; (b) longitudinal cross- sectional micrographs of different cooling holes. Fig. 4. The blockage ratio for each hole of the Rows 1 to 4. L. Liu et al.

[PAGE 6] Engineering Failure Analysis 170 (2025) 109321 6 longitudinal cross-section. The depth of both blockage types is about half the length of the hole, and the curvature radius of the arc is roughly twice the diameter of the hole. Compared to the various simplified structures designed solely based on the transverse cross- sections of semi-arc blockage photographed by Bogard et al., the two structures in this study comprehensively consider the three- dimensional characteristics of blockages observed after testing. The crescent-shaped structure on the pressure surface fully reflects the interaction between the flow field and the blockage, providing a more realistic representation. For the leading-edge blockage, BL is defined as: BL = 2d1 D1 (11) for the blockage on the pressure surface, BP is defined as: BP = d2 D2 (12) where D1 and D2 represent the diameters of the cooling holes at the leading edge and pressure surface, respectively, d1 and d2 denote the cross-sectional widths of the leading-edge and pressure-surface blockages, respectively. In this study, the service environment, loads, and constraints under the maximum operating conditions of a flight mission are used as boundary inputs. Based on the high-pressure turbine blade shown in Fig. 2, a single-cycle geometric model of the blocked blade is established, as shown in Fig. 6. The model parameters are provided in Table 1, where α represents the hole skew angle, nholes denotes the number of cooling holes, and L1 indicates the Sub thickness. Additionally, based on the shell conduction method, the thickness of the BC and TC layers is set to 0.03 mm and 0.09 mm, respectively, and the TGO is set to 0.005 mm to simulate the half-life state of the Fig. 5. The schematic diagrams of the blockage: (a) leading edge blockage; (b) pressure surface blockage. Fig. 6. The single-cycle geometric model and the boundary conditions of the blade with blockage. L. Liu et al.