[PAGE 1] Recent developments in X-ray lens modelling with SRW Rafael Celestrea, Oleg Chubarb, Thomas Rotha, Manuel Sanchez del Rioa, and Raymond Barretta aESRF - The European Synchrotron, 71 Avenue des Martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, France bNational Synchrotron Light Source II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, NY 11973, USA ABSTRACT The advent of 4th generation high-energy synchrotron facilities (ESRF-EBS and the planned APS-U, PETRA-IV and SPring-8 II) and free-electron lasers (Eu-XFEL and LCLS-II) allied with the recent demonstration of high- quality free-form refractive optics for beam shaping and optical correction have revived interest in compound refractive lenses (CRLs) as optics for beam transport, probe formation in X-ray micro- and nano-analysis as well as for imaging applications. Ideal CRLs have long been made available in the ’Synchrotron Radiation Workshop’ (SRW), however, the current context requires more sophisticated modelling of X-ray lenses. In this work, we revisit the already implemented wave-optics model for an ideal X-ray lens in the projection approximation and propose modiﬁcations to it as to allow more degrees of freedom to both the front and back surfaces independently, which enables to reproduce misalignments and manufacturing errors commonly found in X-ray lenses. For the cases where simply tilting and transversely oﬀsetting the parabolic sections of a CRL is not enough, we present the possibility of generating the ﬁgure errors by using Zernike and Legendre polynomials or directly adding metrology data to the lenses. We present the eﬀects of each new degree of freedom by calculating their impact on point spread function and the beam caustics. Keywords: X-ray optics, CRL, X-ray lens, optical modelling, physical optics, SRW 1. INTRODUCTION Refractive X-ray optics comprises mainly lenses [1,2], prisms in several arrangements [3,4] and most recently, free- form objects mainly for optical correction and beam-shaping [5–8]. From those, parabolic compound refractive lenses are by far the dominating refractive optical element in use throughout synchrotrons, hence in this work emphasis is given in describing typical misalignment and fabrication errors of the parabolic CRL [9]. The modelling and functions presented here are based on the framework of physical optics [10] and are tailored to be used transparently with SRW [11], which already provides a model for the CRL [12]. This ideal model combines refraction and absorption for the stacked lenses. Optical imperfections from material inhomogeneities (voids, impurities) were later added to the CRL ideal model in SRW [13]. We begin this proceeding by shortly revisiting the basic model of a transmission element in physical optics and that of an ideal CRL as presented in [12]. Expanding this model, we present the optical imperfections in refractive lenses in three diﬀerent groups: i-) misalignments of a single X-ray lens; ii-) commonly encountered fabrication errors such transverse oﬀsets as well as tilts of the individual parabolic sections; iii-) and other sources of deviations from the parabolic shape modelled with either polynomial decomposition of error functions or by using metrology data. Each newly added feature is accompanied by a calculation of the residual thickness error, its impact on focusing by CRL and the beam caustic in the vicinity of the focal spota. The code main functions implementing the ideal CRL and describing optical imperfections in refractive lenses are subsequently presented and discussed. We ﬁnish by discussing applications and future implementations. Further author information: rafael.celestre@esrf.eu aAll simulations shown throughout Figs. 3-7 and in Fig. 10 have similar conditions, that is, they model misalignments, fabrication errors or arbitrary residual errors to a single 2D-Beryllium lens with nominal radius R = 50 µm, geometric aperture A = 440 µm and twall = 20 µm at 8 keV in fully-coherent simulations. The application of the presented modelling to partially-coherent simulations methods [14] is immediate. arXiv:2007.15461v2 [physics.optics] 4 Aug 2020

[PAGE 2] 2. X-RAY LENS MODELLING For a weak scatterer under the paraxial optics approximation, the transmission element in projection approxi- mation in the physical optics framework is given by [10]: T  ∆z(x, y)] • = p TBL(x, y) exp  iφ(x, y)  •, (1) with: TBL(x, y) = exp  −2kβ(x, y)∆z(x, y)  (2a) = exp  −µ(x, y)∆z(x, y)  , φ(x, y) = −kδ(x, y)∆z(x, y). (2b) k is the wavenumber, the index of refraction is written as n = 1 −δ + i · β, the projected thickness along the z−axis (beam propagation direction) is given by ∆z and it depends on the transverse coordinates (x, y). The • symbol represents the electric ﬁeld to which the transmission operator is applied to. Eq. 2a shows the absorption experienced by the wave-ﬁeld when passing through matter (Beer-Lambert law) and Eq. 2b shows the phase-shift. The coeﬃcient multiplying ∆z in TBL is know as linear attenuation coeﬃcient µ. 2.1 The ideal CRL At any point inside the geometric aperture A of a single bi-concave paraboloidal X-ray lens, the projected thickness ∆z can be calculated as: ∆z(x, y) =      x2 Rx + y2 Ry + twall, ∀(x, y) ∈A, L, otherwise. (3) Here, Rx and Ry represent the apex radius of curvature in the horizontal and vertical directions, twall is the distance between the apices of the parabolic surfaces and L is the lens total thickness as indicated by Fig. 1(a). The lens geometric aperture is related to lens intrinsic parameters by: A = 2 p (L −twall)R. (4) The focal length of such bi-concave lens is related to the curvature radius R by: f = R 2δ . (5) If the lens being modelled is a 1D focusing element, that is a cylinder with parabolic section, one of the radii goes to inﬁnity to account for the non-curved surface. The geometric aperture in this direction is not given by Eq. 4, but arbitrarily chosen (cf. Fig. 2). Eq. 3 can be substituted into Eqs. 2a and 2b to retrieve the complex transmission element expression for an X-ray lens: Tsingle lens(∆z) • = exp  −2π λ β∆z  × exp  −i2π λ δ∆z  • . (6) Eq. 6, the single lens model, accounts for the absorption (ﬁrst exponential) and phase shift (second exponential) from a single X-ray lenslet. Stacked lenses can be simulated either by a single-lens-equivalent representation or by using multi-slice-like techniques, where the X-ray beam is propagated using free-space propagators in between the optical elements [15].

[PAGE 3] (d) (e) (f) (g) L twall A R y z (a) (c) (b) Figure 1: (a) ideal lens for reference. Lens typical misalignments are the (b) transverse oﬀset and the (c) tilt or a combination of both. Common fabrication errors include the (d) longitudinal oﬀset of the parabolic section, (e) transverse oﬀset of the parabolic section and (f)-(g) tilted parabolic sections. y z x (a) 1D focusing lens y z x (b) 2D focusing lens 500 μm (c) 1D focusing Be lens with R = 100 µm 500 μm (d) 2D focusing Be lens with R = 50 µm Figure 2: 1D (left) and 2D focusing (right) X-ray lenses. The top row shows a 3D rendering of such lenses with emphasis on the parabolic proﬁle - shaded in purple is the vertical proﬁle and in green, the horizontal proﬁle. Bottom row shows scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of two Be lenses. Due to the limited ﬁeld of view, image (c) is stitched, which explains the colour discontinuation on the left side of the image. 2.2 Describing optical imperfections in refractive lenses In the paraxial approximation, the parabolic shape for a refracting surface is generally regarded as the ideal shapeb for minimising aberrations. It is legit, then, to deﬁne as errors any deviation from this ideal parabolic formc regardless of its origin. The phase errors induced by an ideal lens misalignment will be presented ﬁrst, then the typical fabrication errors of bi-concave lenses will be presented shortly after. The misalignment and fabrications errors presented in this section were derived from the accumulated experience in handling beryllium bThe shape of a focusing refracting surface can be derived from the Fermat’s principle, but the parabolic shape is generally regarded as a good approximation. Large apertures are often necessary when very small focused beams are required, but increasing the geometric aperture of the optical element causes the parabolic approximation to under- perform. Several aspheric surface shapes for diﬀerent focusing conditions were reported in [16] - cf. Fig 4. For a deeper discussion on aspheric surfaces in the context of optics, please, refer to [17]. cSuch deﬁnition, however, leaves out discrepancies in the radius of curvature R (designed vs. de facto) and the associated defocus it may cause. Discrepancies between designed and executed lenses may render them to be labelled as out-of-speciﬁcation and may cause the system to under-perform, but are not deviations of the parabolic shape, provided the ideal parabolic shape takes into account the de facto radius of curvature. Accounting for such discrepancies can be done using the ideal model described by the transmission element Tsingle lens(∆z) (cf. Eq. 6) using the de facto radius of curvature.

[PAGE 4] −10 0 10 (µm) −10 0 10 (µm) 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 (a) PSF −200 0 200 (mm) −20 −10 0 10 20 (µm) 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 (b) vertical caustics Figure 3: Simulations of a single ideal 2D-Beryllium lens with nominal radius R = 50 µm, geometric aperture A = 440 µm and twall = 20 µm at 8 keV - cf. Fig 1(a). (a) Point-spread function with cuts centred in (0, 0) and (b) the vertical beam caustics from -250 mm to 250 mm in respect to the focal plane. and aluminium bi-concave embossed lenses, which are the most available throughout beamlines in diverse syn- chrotron facilities. However, the modelling presented here is generic and can be applied to a wide-range of CRL from diverse fabrication processesd. Fig. 3 shows the focusing performance of a single ideal 2D-Beryllium lens with nominal radius R = 50 µm, geometric aperture A = 440 µm and twall = 20 µm at 8 keV using the SRW basic modelling. 2.3 Misalignments Misalignments of optical systems are not optical errors per se as they can be mitigated by ensuring proper alignment is done; they will, however, cause changes to the ideal parabolic phase proﬁle if left uncorrected and will aﬀect the optical performance of the system. Although aligning a CRL stack is possiblee, the individual lenslets usually cannot be aligned to each other, hence the interest in modelling such misalignments. Transverse oﬀset Shifting transversely a single element an transverse distance (∆x, ∆y) can be simply done by calculating ∆z(x − ∆x, y −∆y) in Eq. 3. The shifted element is depicted in Fig. 1(b). For a pair of coordinates (x, y): ∆z(x −∆x, y −∆y) =      (x −∆x)2 Rx + (y −∆y)2 Ry + twall, ∀(x −∆x, y −∆y) ∈A, L, otherwise. (7) Eq. 7 is the ideal parabolic proﬁle of a bi-concave lens given by Eq. 3 with its vertices centred around (∆x, ∆y). While a single transversely shifted lens considered on its own is innocuous, piling up several shifted lenses has impacts on the overall accumulated phase parabolic shape and resulting geometric aperture. Although the exact eﬀect of relative misaligments between individual lenses on the phase of the wave-ﬁeld depends on the distance between lenslets, the energy, footprint and divergence of the X-ray beam, some insight can be gained by considering the individual focusing elements as thin-optical elements in intimate contact. Consider N stacked lenses transversely misaligned with their transverse distance to the optical axis given by (∆xj, ∆yj), with j = 1, 2, ..., N. Within the intersection of their geometric apertures, the accumulated thickness is given dcf. Table 1 from the supplementary material relative to [18]. eThe possibility of realignment of the CRL depends on where and how they are installed in the beamline. If their installation is on a bulky transfocator [19], their realignment is more diﬃcult to be performed. However, when used as a ﬁnal focusing element, enclosed in small casings or compact transfocators - cf. Fig. 3 in [9] and [20, 21], their realignment can be done more easily.

[PAGE 5] −200 0 200 (µm) −25 0 25 ∆z (µm) (a) residues −10 0 10 (µm) −10 0 10 (µm) 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 (b) PSF −200 0 200 (mm) −20 −10 0 10 20 (µm) 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 (c) vertical caustics Figure 4: Simulations of an ideal lens shifted by ∆y = 5 µm - cf. Fig 1(b). (a) Residual thickness, (b) point spread function with cuts centred in (0, 0) and (c) the vertical beam caustics from -250 mm to 250 mm in respect to the focal plane. 2D-Beryllium lens with nominal radius R = 50 µm, geometric aperture A = 440 µm and twall = 20 µm at 8 keV. by: ∆zΣ(x, y) = N X j=1 ∆z(∆xj, ∆yj) = N X j=1 x2 Rxj + y2 Ryj | {z } (I) −2x∆xj Rxj −2y ∆yj Ryj | {z } (II) + ∆2 xj Rxj + ∆2 yj Ryj + twallj | {z } (III) . (8) The ﬁrst term in Eq. 8, (I) is a quadratic term and it indicates ideal focusing as in Eq. 3. The residual terms (II) and (III) are a linear term in x and y and a constant oﬀset term, respectively. The projected thickness and the phase are linearly proportional, so the residual accumulated thickness translates directly into residual accumulated phase and both terms can be used interchangeably - cf. Eq.2b. The ﬁrst residual term, i.e. (II), adds a linear phase to the wave-front and acts like a prism, not deforming the monochromatic wave-ﬁeld, but redirecting it. At the focal plane, the image position is transversely shifted but no change to the intensity and phase proﬁles is added. Symmetrically shifted lensesf make (II) goes to zero. The residual terms in (III) add a constant phase oﬀset to the transmitted beam. The eﬀects of the transverse oﬀset to a single X-ray lens are shown in Fig. 4. Tilted lens When rotating a lens in space as shown in Fig. 1(c) and calculating its projected thickness, it is helpful to decouple the rotation of the front and back surfaces. This can be done by deﬁning a point cloud in Cartesian coordinates: zfront surface(x −∆x, y −∆y) = ∆z(x −∆x, y −∆y) 2 , (9a) zback surface(x −∆x, y −∆y) = −∆z(x −∆x, y −∆y) 2 (9b) where ∆z(x −∆x, y −∆y) is given by Eq. 7. The projected thickness is given by: ∆z(x, y) = zfront surface(x, y) −zback surface(x, y), (10) fThat is ∆xm = −∆xn or ∆ym = −∆yn for m, n ∈(1, 2, ..., N).

[PAGE 6] −200 0 200 (µm) −1 0 1 2 ∆z (µm) (a) residues −10 0 10 (µm) −10 0 10 (µm) 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 (b) PSF −200 0 200 (mm) −20 −10 0 10 20 (µm) 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 (c) vertical caustics Figure 5: Simulations of an ideal lens tilted by θx = 1◦- cf. Fig 1(c). (a) Residual thickness, (b) point spread function with cuts centred in (0, 0) and (c) the vertical beam caustics from -250 mm to 250 mm in respect to the focal plane. 2D-Beryllium lens with nominal radius R = 50 µm, geometric aperture A = 440 µm and twall = 20 µm at 8 keV. The proﬁle shown in (a) is proportional to the 4th power of the lateral coordinates in the direction of the shift. This contributes for the elongation of the beam along the propagation direction and shift on the focal plane position as evidenced by (c). This is a typical sign of spherical aberrations. provided those are calculated on the same grid (x, y). A tilted lens can be described by rotation matrices in three dimensions. The transformation matrices allowing a rotation θx,y,z around each of the Cartesian axis are [22]: Rx =   1 0 0 0 0 cos θx −sin θx 0 0 sin θx cos θx 0 0 0 0 1   (rotation around the x−axis), (11a) Ry =   cos θy 0 sin θy 0 0 1 0 0 −sin θy 0 cos θy 0 0 0 0 1   (rotation around the y−axis), (11b) Rz =   cos θz −sin θz 0 0 sin θz cos θz 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1   (rotation around the z−axis). (11c) Matrix multiplication is associative, which implies that if multiple rotations are involved, that is Rx, Ry and Rz are applied to a set of points (x, y, z), an equivalent rotation matrix Rθ = RzRyRx can be calculated and then, applied to those points is space: [xθ, yθ, zθ, 1]T = RzRyRx[x, y, z, 1]T, = Rθ[x, y, z, 1]T, (12) where (xθ, yθ, zθ) are the transformed (x, y, z) coordinates after the Rθ = RzRyRx rotation and the T in Eq. 12 represents transposed matrices. The rotations given by Rθ have to be applied to both the front and back surfaces of the lens independently, with their respective point clouds given by Eqs. 9. In order to calculate the projected thickness along the optical axis, the rotated front and back surfaces have to be recalculated on a common grid, which is done by two-dimensional interpolation of (xθ, yθ, zθ) to the original (x, y) grid. The associative property allows for considerable computation time reduction, as the rotation can be done applying a single equivalent rotation matrix as opposed to three individual rotations. On the other hand, matrix multiplication