[PAGE 1] Surface integrity and low cycle fatigue behavior of Ni-based single-crystal film cooling holes processed by ECM, EDM and PLM Zhenwei Li a,b, Cheng Wang a,b, Zhixun Wen a,b,*, Zhufeng Yue a,b a School of Mechanics, Civil Engineering and Architecture, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, PR China b State Key Laboratory of Clean and Efficient Turbomachinery Power Equipment, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, PR China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Ni-based single crystal Low cycle fatigue Film cooling holes Surface integrity Fatigue damage A B S T R A C T Surface integrity and low cycle fatigue (LCF) behavior of Ni-based single crystal film cooling hole (FCH) structures manufactured via three different processes—Electrochemical Machining (ECM), Electrical Discharge Machining (EDM), and Picosecond Laser Machining (PLM)—were investi­ gated at high temperature. The surface integrity resulting from different drilling methods was analyzed across three aspects: geometry, metallurgy and roughness. Experimental results indicate that the LCF lifetime is significantly influenced by the drilling processes, with the order being NECM > NEDM > NPLM. In addition, while the drilling process minimally impacts the macroscopic fracture path and fracture morphology, it greatly influences the microstructural evolution near the cracks around the FCHs. Utilizing geometric reconstruction modeling, the crystal plasticity finite element method (CPFEM) was performed for three kinds of FCH model. The maximum resolved shear stress (RSS) around the three FCH models is mainly affected by surface integrity, with the order being RSSECM > RSSEDM > RSSPLM. Moreover, the fatigue damage distribution locations in all FCH models align well with the fatigue crack nucleation position observed in experiments. The fatigue life simulated using the damage evolution law falls within the error bands of ±2 times. 1. Introduction Ni-based single crystal superalloy has excellent high-temperature fatigue properties and is commonly used in the manufacture of aero-engine turbine blades [1–3]. With the continuous increase of the turbine inlet temperature, the melting point of blades made from Ni-base single crystal is often exceeded during operation [4–6]. By processing FCHs on the turbine blade and introducing low- temperature cooling air, a protective air film can be formed on the blade surface, which significantly reduces the wall temperature and friction resistance [7]. However, the existence of the FCHs destroys the structural integrity of the turbine blade [8,9]. Under the action of rotating centrifugal force and high-frequency vibration, the blade is prone to fatigue failure at the FCHs position [10,11]. The fatigue performance of the structure is very sensitive to the surface quality of the manufacturing [12], which further weakens the fatigue life of the turbine blade. Therefore, it is of great significance to study the influence of surface integrity on fatigue performance. In recent years, the influence of different manufacturing processes on the fatigue properties of the FCH structures has been extensively studied. Liang [13] investigated the effect of picosecond laser and nanosecond laser drilling on fatigue life and microscopic * Corresponding author at: School of Mechanics, Civil Engineering and Architecture, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, PR China. E-mail address: zxwen@nwpu.edu.cn (Z. Wen). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Engineering Fracture Mechanics journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engfracmech https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engfracmech.2025.111378 Received 20 February 2025; Received in revised form 20 June 2025; Accepted 1 July 2025 Engineering Fracture Mechanics 326 (2025) 111378 Available online 9 July 2025 0013-7944/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

[PAGE 2] Nomenclature Abbreviations LCF Low cycle fatigue FCHs Film cooling holes CPFEM Crystal plasticity finite element method RSS Resolved shear stress ECM Electrochemical machining EDM Electrical discharge machining PLM Picosecond laser machining TIT Turbine inlet temperature EIFS Equivalent initial flaw size OM Optical microscope SEM Scanning electron microscopy EDS Energy dispersive spectroscopy EBSD Electron backscattered diffraction FEM finite element model C3D8 Three-dimensional eight nodes SS Slip system Symbols Z Individual data points p Average value N Total amount of data θ Taper RE Entrance radius Ro Outlet radius L Depth τ Shear stress σ Stress tensor P Orientation factor of slip system m(α) Unit vectors normal to the slip plane n(α) Unit vectors along the slip direction EMT Instantaneous elastic modulus tensor̂ σ Stress rate H Deformation rate tensor ˙γ(α) Shear strain rate W(α) Rotatory tensor g(α) 0 Reference shear stress sgn () Sign function X Back stress C, a, d, Q, α, n Material constants T Temperature Y Dynamic recovery term of the back stress Yst Saturation value hαβ Slip hardening modulus qαβ Matrix describing the latent harding hβ Single harding rate C11, C12, C44 Elastic constant E Elastic modulus G Shear modulus μ Poisson ratio σb Yield stress Crss Critical shear stress ˙γα 0 Reference shear strain rate m Strain rate sensitivity h0 Hardening modulus τs Correction stress q Correction parameter Z. Li et al. Engineering Fracture Mechanics 326 (2025) 111378 2

[PAGE 3] fracture morphology of the FCH structures with single and multi holes. Wen then analyzed [14] the surface quality of multi-FCHs and compared [15] the fatigue life of FCH structures drilled by forming electrical discharge machining (EDM) and high-speed EDM. Zhang [16] carried out a high-cycle fatigue test using multi-level stress levels, and obtained the fatigue limits of multi-FCH structures manufactured by millisecond laser (ML), EDM and electrochemical machining (ECM), respectively. Morar [17] investigated the effect of laser trepanning speed and recast layer thickness on the high temperature corrosion fatigue behavior of CMSX-4 superalloy acute angled FCHs. While the manufacturing process has a significant impact on the fatigue performance of FCH structures, the specific reasons have not been analyzed from the perspective of surface integrity mechanisms. Subsequently, Yuan [18] studied the effects of the recast layer around the laser-drilled FCHs on the fatigue failure mechanisms and found the recast layer have obvious shielding effect in improve the fatigue performance of the mismatched material system. Shang [19] reported that the crack initiates on the FCH edge with different crystallographic directions depending on the drill-produced recast layer. The different chemical compositions and phase structures result in the softer nature of the recast layer and the special stress/ strain concentrated in it. Li [20] summarized the differences in surface condition of the FCHs caused by different drilling processes (EDM and ML), and proposed a simple unified model of fatigue crack growth rate to describe whole process from crack initiation to fracture in detail. Zhang [21] proposed a new drilling process combining ultrashort pulse laser drilling with abrasive flow machining, and discussed the influence of the different hole-making technologies on the fatigue properties of diffusive FCHs, integrating the CPFEM results with analyses of surface quality and fatigue fractography. Surface quality is inevitably affected in the manufacturing process of the FCHs. The evaluation of the FCHs’ surface quality is of great significance for accurately predicting fatigue life. Wen [22] proposed a method to predict the low cycle fatigue lifetime of the FCHs by combining crystal plasticity theory and the critical distance theory. Considering the effect of the inhomogeneous rafting microstructure surrounding the FCH, Fan [23] established a strain energy-based microstructure-sensitive fatigue life model for Ni- based single crystal with center FCH. Based on continuum damage mechanics model, Zhang [24] introduced initial damage for the FCHs caused by drilling technologies into the damage evolution law, thus establishing a life prediction model with high accuracy. Li [25] presents a novel modeling framework for predicting fatigue life performance with varying FCHs, based on the equivalent initial flaw size (EIFS) concept. However, the above fatigue life equivalent prediction method is not established based on the surface damage mechanism of the real FCHs configuration. The complex effect of surface integrity on fatigue damage is still not yet fully understood. This study investigates the surface integrity-based low cycle fatigue behavior and fatigue life prediction method. Firstly, Ni-based single crystal plate specimens with five FCHs were prepared by ECM, EDM and picosecond laser machining (PLM), and low cycle fatigue tests were performed at 980℃/600 MPa. Secondly, the fracture path, fracture morphology, and microstructure evolution were analyzed using an optical microscope (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Thirdly, the finite element twin models were established based on surface integrity analysis and geometric model simplification. Subsequently, the distribution of RSS around the FCHs from different drilling processes was calculated using damage-coupling CPFEM. Finally, the fatigue damage characteristics and life prediction of Ni-based single crystal FCH structures were studied, considering surface integrity. D Fatigue damage τoct Reference RSS of octahedral slip systems R Gas constant Nf Fatigue life nfat Material constant mfat Material constant Fig. 1. Material and specimens: (a) a schematic of Ni-based single crystal blank bar; (b) microstructure of DD6 with the [001] orientation; (c) geometric size of I-shape flat plate specimens with FCHs (unit: mm). Z. Li et al. Engineering Fracture Mechanics 326 (2025) 111378 3

[PAGE 4] 2. Experimental methodology 2.1. Material and specimens A second-generation Ni-based single crystal superalloy was used in the present experiment. The principal chemical composition of the superalloy is given in Table 2. After melting master alloy in a vacuum induction furnace, it was made into [001] orientation using a directional solidification furnace, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The growth direction of the specimens was determined to be within 8◦of the desired orientation by electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) analysis. For all specimens, the heat treatments were as following: 1290 ◦C × 1 h + 1300 ◦C × 2 h + 1315 ◦C × 4 h/AC + 1120 ◦C × 4 h/AC + 870 ◦C × 32 h/AC (AC means air cooling to room temperature). The aim of the full heat treatment was to reduce the dendrite segregation and enhance homogenization of the me­ chanical behavior. The microstructures of the γ/γ′ phases of the experimental alloy with the [001] orientation were composed of a γ matrix containing well-aligned coherent cuboidal γ′ precipitates with an average edge length of 0.3–0.5 μm, as shown in Fig. 1(b). For convenient connection with the fatigue testing machine, the I-shape flat plate specimens were designed in Fig. 1(c). Each specimen contains five FCHs. The arrangement of the FCHs forms a centrally symmetric triangular alignment, with a maximum width of 0.5 mm and a geometric center spacing of 0.75 mm between each row of FCHs. The geometric dimensions of the specimen are as follows: the total length is 54 mm, the total width is 29 mm, the length and width of the intermediate assessment section is 10 mm and 5 mm, respectively, and the width of the I-shaped end is 9.5 mm. All specimens in this work have a thickness of 1.5 mm. All the tests of specimens correspond to the [001] orientation, with the secondary orientations along [010] and [100] orientations. 2.2. FCHs drilling by different processes 2.2.1. Process characteristics To study the influence of different FCH manufacturing processes on the surface quality and fatigue performance, three common industrial processes were used to fabricate FCHs according to the design schematics. Specifically, the ECM, EDM and picosecond laser machining (PLM) were selected. In the middle section of the specimens, these three drilling processes were used to produce FCHs with identical geometric dimensions and configuration. To strictly ensure consistent crystal orientation of the specimens, all the specimens were taken from the same casting single crystal blank in a direction parallel to [001] orientation. The axial direction of the FCHs is along the [100] orientation. The ECM method utilizes the electrochemical reaction between the electrolyte and workpiece to dissolve and removes material. This process is based on electrochemical corrosion principles, and its processing principal diagram is shown in Fig. 2(a). The EDM drilling method primarily involves generating continuous pulsed spark discharges between the tool and workpiece. The instantaneous high temperature generated during discharge vaporizes the metal, achieving drilling, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The PLM process of FCH fabrication involves precisely heating the material with high-energy laser pulses to achieve selective material removal and fine processing, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The macroscopic SEM results of FCHs produced by ECM, EDM, and PLM are shown in Fig. 2(d) (e) and (f), respectively. ECM is a type of cold machining in which material removal relies on electrochemical dissolution at the anode. The specimen surface near the FCH will be corroded, as shown in Fig. 3(a). However, ECM drilling technology does not cause residual stress, recast layer and heat affected zone [29]. In addition, ECM machining efficiency is greatly reduced and tends to cause stray corrosion and residual corrosion layer, as shown in Fig. 3(d) and (g). During the EDM drilling process, the material surface is exposed to extremely high Fig. 2. FCHs manufactured by different process: the principle of (a) ECM [26], (b) EDM [27], (c) PLM [28]; physical picture of (d) ECM, (e)EDM, (f) PLM. Z. Li et al. Engineering Fracture Mechanics 326 (2025) 111378 4

[PAGE 5] temperatures, causing the material to melt into a molten state, as shown in Fig. 3(b). This molten material then flows due to recoil pressure and surface tension, among other forces [30]. This flow leads to redistribution of the melt on the hole wall or the machining surface, ultimately forming a recast layer, as shown in Fig. 3(e)–(h). PLM features ultrashort pulses and ultrahigh power density, with the target material being removed in the form of plasma eruption [31]. The FCHs produced by PLM no longer have remelted layer. Under this mechanism, PLM drilling technology can manufacture the FCHs without thermal damage or micro-cracks, as shown in Fig. 3 (c) and (f). The variance in the morphology of FCHs generated by distinct drilling techniques is related to the varying material removal principles for Ni-based single crystal superalloys. 2.2.2. Geometric feature of FCHs The geometric dimensions of FCHs in three specimens prepared by three different perforating processes were statistically analyzed, as shown in Fig. 4. The inlet and outlet apertures are parameters related to the quality of micro-size FCHs. The average inlet aperture of FCHs fabricated by ECM, EDM and PLM are 0.524 mm, 0.636 mm and 0.478 mm, respectively. And the average outlet aperture of FCHs Fig. 3. The metallurgical characteristics of FCH produced by different processes: (a) (d) (g) ECM; (b) (e) (h) EDM; (c) (f) (i) PLM. Fig. 4. Statistics of inlet and outlet aperture of FCHs drilling in different processes. Z. Li et al. Engineering Fracture Mechanics 326 (2025) 111378 5

[PAGE 6] fabricated by ECM, EDM and PLM are 0.419 mm, 0.426 mm and 0.409 mm, respectively. Among the three drilling processes, the order of inlet aperture is as follows: PLM > ECM > EDM; the order of outlet aperture is as follows: PLM > ECM > EDM. The geometric dispersion of FCHs manufactured by different processes was analyzed by variance statistics. In the analysis, the total variance is D(Z), where Z represents individual data points, p represents the average value, and N represents the total amount of data. D(Z) = ∑ (Z −p)2/N (1) The variances of ECM, EDM, and PLM entrance and outlet apertures were 4.22E-4, 11.47E-4, 1.28E-4, 1.22E-4, 3.83E-5 and 1.27E-5, respectively. The larger the variance, the more dispersed the data distribution, the greater the fluctuation, and the lower the stability of hole making quality. The taper of the FCH is an important parameter to describe the conformity of its geometric characteristics. The existence of the taper will reduce the manufacturing conformity, thereby affecting the fatigue performance of the turbine blade. For the circular FCH, Fig. 5. The taper of FCHs manufactured by different processes: (a) ECM; (b) EDM; (c) PLM. Z. Li et al. Engineering Fracture Mechanics 326 (2025) 111378 6