[PAGE 1] 1 Large-area femtosecond laser milling of silicon employing trench analysis Arun Bhaskar*a,b, Justine Philippea, Flavie Brauda, Etienne Okadaa, Vanessa Avramovica, Jean- François Robillarda, Cédric Durandb, Daniel Gloriab, Christophe Gaquièrea, Emmanuel Duboisa* aUniv. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Univ. Polytechnique Hauts-de-France, Yncréa Hauts-de-France, UMR 8520 - IEMN, F-59000 Lille, France bSTMicroelectronics, 850 Rue Jean Monnet, FR-38926 Crolles Keywords Femtosecond laser micromachining, Laser milling, Optical profilometer characterization, Silicon-on- insulator (SOI) technology, Radio-frequency (RF) integrated circuits Abstract A femtosecond laser is a powerful tool for micromachining of silicon. In this work, large-area laser ablation of crystalline silicon is comprehensively studied using a laser source of pulse width 300 fs at two wavelengths of 343 nm and 1030 nm. We develop a unique approach to gain insight into the laser milling process by means of detailed analysis of trenches. Laser scribed trenches and milled areas are characterized using optical profilometry to extract dimensional and roughness parameters with accuracy and repeatability. In a first step, multiple measures of the trench including the average depth, the volume of recast material, the average longitudinal profile roughness, the inner trench width and the volume removal rate are studied. This allows for delineation of ablation regimes and associated characteristics allowing to determine the impact of fluence and repetition rate on laser milling. In a second step, additional factors of debris formation and material redeposition that come into play during laser milling are further elucidated. These results are utilized for processing large-area (up to few mm2) with milling depths up to 200 µm to enable the fabrication of cavities with low surface roughness at high removal rates of up to 6.9 µm3 µs-1. Finally, laser processing in combination with XeF2 etching is applied on SOI-CMOS technology in the fabrication of radio-frequency (RF) functions standing on suspended membranes. Performance is considerably improved on different functions like RF switch (23 dB improvement in 2nd harmonic), inductors (near doubling of Q-factor) and LNA (noise figure improvement of 0.1 dB) demonstrating the applicability of milling to radio-frequency applications. 1. Introduction Laser micromachining is a tool which is becoming increasingly relevant for micro/nanostructuring of materials. The use of ultrashort laser processing with pulse width in femtosecond range is advantageous because it can be applied on a wide range of materials like metals, semiconductors, dielectrics, alloys, and ceramics [1–4]. The range of surface processing is diverse varying from a small scale (a few nm2) [5,6] to large scale (a few mm2) [7–9]. Heat affected zone is greatly reduced for ultrashort lasers which allows for enhanced machining quality with low thermal impact of laser radiation on material. Femtosecond micromachining of silicon has been reported previously in different studies. It has been explored for various applications like microfluidics [10], photovoltaics [11], IC characterization [7],

[PAGE 2] 2 hydrophobic surfaces [12], and laser dicing [13,14]. For this work, the targeted application is the fabrication of free standing membranes of SOI-CMOS RF circuits/functions on Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) wafers. The term SOI-CMOS refers to CMOS processing technology used in semiconductor industry in combination with SOI wafer as the host substrate. SOI wafer comprises of a thick layer of handler silicon at the bottom, typically 750 µm, topped with a thin isolating buried oxide (BOX) layer and finally a thin layer of active silicon on the top. Microelectronic devices and circuits are realized into the topmost silicon active layer. The buried oxide is a thin layer of silicon dioxide which provides electrical isolation between active and handler silicon. Handler silicon is present for mechanical support and thermal dissipation. Despite the presence of an isolating BOX layer, handler substrate degrades electrical performance because it offers a parasitic coupling path to RF signals. By locally removing handler silicon under the active area of circuits, they can be suspended on the BOX in the form of a membrane. The motivation for creation of such membranes is to attain better RF performance with reduced loss and improved linearity as it has been reported previously in numerous similar studies [15–22]. The technique of laser milling is used in this work to create cavities underneath RF functions implemented in SOI-CMOS technology. The laser beam is raster scanned over the area to be milled. The starting thickness of SOI wafer is usually high (~750 µm) in order to prevent wafer warping during fabrication. As a preliminary step, the wafer is thinned down using processes like grinding and chemical mechanical polishing (CMP). The final thickness of silicon is much smaller and depends on the application requirements. With this in mind, the laser milling process is studied for depths up to 200 µm. The process is adaptable for geometries of side length ranging from ~100 µm to several mm by appropriately defining the laser milling trajectory. The objective of this study is the development of a milling methodology that enables the control of surface quality and roughness while keeping the volume removal rate high. During micromachining of silicon, a commonly identified problem is the appearance of surface corrugations [13,23–27] which renders the surface cross section comb like as shown in Fig. 1. In the top view (Fig. 1c), these corrugations appear as microholes which can penetrate deep into the material depending on the process parameters used for milling. These corrugations are also observed in other materials like germanium [28]. They are not to be confused with the Laser Induced Periodic Surface Structures (LIPSS) which are ripples of the order of the wavelength of laser radiation [29,30]. In this study, this problem is tackled by choosing appropriate process parameters to minimize formation of corrugations in order to keep the roughness low while still having sufficiently high rates of removal. In this work, a systematic approach is employed whereby step-by-step insight is gained towards best parameters for laser milling. In the first step, trenches (grooves) are scribed in silicon by linear displacement of the laser beam. Scribing allows quick estimation of impact of different process parameters on milling without performing two-dimensional surface machining. Section 3 reports different trench measures that are going to be studied and quantified by using optical profilometer measurements. The understanding of these parameters lays the foundation for high quality and high removal rate milling. Section 4 subsequently proposes the study of the surface laser milling to further understand the aspects of changing surface morphology, effect of debris, surface roughness and sidewall quality. The application of laser milling is presented in section 5 where membranes of RF circuits are fabricated. RF characterization of such circuits is performed in order to demonstrate the superior performance of the circuits on SOI membranes.

[PAGE 3] 3 Fig. 1. (a) Linear translation of laser (b) Cross section of machined line and (c) Top view of machined line 2. Experimental description 2.1 Laser system The experiments are performed under ambient conditions using a Diode Pumped Solid State (DPSS) ultrafast fiber laser from Amplitude Systèmes (Tangerine) with a fundamental output at 1030 nm and pulse width (FWHM) of 300 fs. Additional wavelength output of 343 nm is generated using a harmonic box (Amplitude-Systèmes). The 343 nm wavelength is obtained by frequency tripling realized by cascading non-linear crystals, beginning with frequency doubling of the fundamental input beam at 1030 nm and subsequent sum frequency generation of both waves.The maximum power output available at the workpiece is 1.2 W and 13 W for 343 nm and 1030 nm sources, respectively. Power attenuation is achieved by cascading a rotating birefringent half-wave plate with a polarizer which provides a continuous variation of the laser power while decoupling the power attenuation from the laser repetition rate. The pulse repetition rate for maximum efficiency of laser output is 200 kHz and can go up to 2 MHz with reduced efficiency. The laser beam displacement is effected by a galvanometric scanner (Canon) followed by a flat-field telecentric lens (Sill Optics) with a focal length of 100 mm. The maximum galvo speed for milling without path distortions is 20 mm s-1 and 100 mm s-1 for 1030 nm source and 343 nm source respectively [15]. The beam waist (radius) is determined experimentally using the regression of squared diameter on fluence as first proposed by Liu et al. [31]. For 343 nm and 1030 nm sources, the measured beam waist on silicon is 5.8 ± 0.3 µm and 8.2 ± 0.2 µm, respectively. A quarter wave (𝜆/4) plate is placed before the lens to obtain a circular polarization of the laser beam. Laser micromachining is performed on High-Resistivity (HR) SOI substrate with resistivity > 1 kΩ.cm. This value of resistivity is 2-3 orders of magnitude higher than normal silicon wafer. However, the interpretations in this study is applicable for any type of silicon as it has been shown that substrate resistivity does not affect the ablation threshold for multi-pulse ablation [32]. The laser machined lines and cavities are characterized using optical profilometry, optical microscopy and scanning electron

[PAGE 4] 4 microscopy (SEM). The optical profilometer (Bruker ContourGT-X) is a non-contact profiler based on vertical scanning interferometry using a broadband white light source. The SEM (Zeiss Supra55VP) scans are taken at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. For SOI-CMOS application demonstration, gas phase XeF2 etching is used to selectively remove silicon with respect to silicon dioxide. An etch-protect layer (Ajinomoto GX-T31) is laminated on the back side of the SOI die. This ensures that silicon is removed completely only in the areas where cavities are milled leaving the BOX layer intact. The etching is performed in a Xactix XeF2 etcher. 2.2 Choice of parameters for trench scribing Scribing of trenches is the first stage of our analysis to study the different ablation regimes and to determine the fluence and repetition rate suitable for milling application. The parameters that are varied are the pulse repetition rate (𝑓௥௘௣), pulse energy (𝐸௣) and scan speed (𝑣௦௖௔௡). From the chosen parameters, the average power can be given by the expression: 𝑃௔௩௚= 𝐸௣𝑓௥௘௣ (1) To obtain high removal rates, a maximum average power of >1 W up to ~2.5 W is used for removal of trenches. Although higher power is supported in the laser system for the 1030 nm line, it is not utilized because surface roughness and volume removal rate are degraded at high power as it shall be discussed in section 3.2. In order to obtain a given average power, the pulse repetition rate and the pulse energy can be independently chosen. When the pulse energy is varied, correspondingly the peak fluence of the laser pulse changes as given by the expression: 𝜙଴= ଶா೛ గ௪బ మ (2) Here, 𝑤଴ is the beam waist radius, the radial distance measured from beam cross section at focal plane where the intensity reduces to 1/𝑒ଶ times the value at the centre. All fluence values reported hereinafter corresponds to the peak fluence. Three cases of trench scribing have been studied as shown in Table 1. For the first two cases, 200 kHz repetition rate is used as this is the repetition rate at which laser efficiency peaks. For the third case repetition rate is reduced to 30 kHz so that power corresponding to maximum pulse energy is sufficiently high (~1.8 W). While these cases have been briefly treated in [16], this paper outlines a detailed analysis into each case. Three scan speeds are studied per case. Each scribed trench is characterized using optical profilometry. The different analyses that are performed for each scribed trench are: average trench depth, recast layer volume, average profile roughness, average trench width and volume removal rate. A graphical illustration of measured parameters can be found in Appendix A.1. Each analysis is presented separately in section 3. Table 1. Different cases in trench scribing study Case Repetition rate (kHz) Average Power (W) Fluence ( J cm-2) Wavelength (nm) 1 200 0.08 – 1.21 0.76 – 11.67 343 2 200 0.18 – 2.56 0.86 – 12.11 1030 3 30 0.09 – 1.79 2.59 – 56.5 1030 The uncertainty on measured depths is less than 1% owing to the high accuracy of vertical scanning interferometry. The accuracy of volume measurements is primarily governed by the evaluation of distances in the plane of the sample surface. This accuracy is a function of the spatial sampling determined by the magnification of the lens and the pixel capacity of the observation camera.

[PAGE 5] 5 In this study, we estimate that lateral distances are affected by a maximum fixed error of 1 µm corresponding to 2 spatial sampling pixels. The power meter accuracy is less than 3%. Based on these figures, the uncertainty in fluence is estimated as < 13%. 3. Scribing of trenches This section presents the discussion regarding the different experimental observations made in the scribing of trenches utilizing the parameters detailed in section 2.2. 3.1 Ablation regimes in micromachining of silicon Laser micromachining is essentially multi-pulse ablation wherein different ablation regimes can be identified. Each ablation regime is characterized by a certain dominant physical mechanism of ablation and the regimes are separated by a threshold fluence, which changes as a function of the process parameters that are employed. In this section, the average trench depth and recast layer volume are studied to distinguish the ablation regimes. 3.1.1 Average trench depth (𝑑௧) The optical profilometer renders a 3D profile of the trench. A 1D height profile is taken approximately along the central axis of the trench. Average trench depth is determined by summing the different height values comprising the axial trench profile and dividing by the number of points as given by the equation: 𝑑௧= ଵ ே∑𝑧௜ ே ଵ (3) For the 3 cases, the plots of average trench depth as a function of fluence is shown in Fig. 2. The depth plotted on a semi-logarithmic scale shows two ablation regimes with different ablation thresholds. This is a well-known phenomenon which has been reported in metals [1,33], semiconductors [23,34] and dielectrics [35,36]. The depths in the two regimes can be given by 𝑑௧ ௚,௦= 𝑙௚,௦𝑙𝑛൬ థబ థ೟೓ ೒,ೞ൰ (4) where 𝑑௧ ௚,௦ is the average trench depth, 𝜙௧௛ ௚,௦ the threshold fluence and 𝑙௚,௦ the characteristic ablation depth with the subscript/superscript index ‘g’ and ‘s’ standing for gentle and strong ablation regimes. The transition fluence between these two regimes is determined by the scan speed when all other laser parameters are fixed. Higher scan speeds allow utilization of higher fluence (consequently a higher average power) in the gentle ablation regime. Thus, higher removal rates can be obtained by using higher scan speeds while still operating in the gentle ablation regime. The ablation regime is important as it determines several aspects like recast layer volume, roughness, trench width narrowing and a detailed discussion of this is presented in sections 3.3 – 3.5. From the plots of average depth as a function of fluence, curve fitting is performed to associate data points with the two regimes. The extracted values of characteristic depth and threshold fluence for the 3 cases at different speeds are tabulated in Table 2. Sample trench profiles for the two regimes have been provided in appendix A.2. With increase in wavelength, both the characteristic depths (𝑙௚,௦) and threshold fluences (𝜙௧௛ ௚,௦) increase at a given speed. In the gentle ablation regime, at repetition rate of 200 kHz, the difference in ablation thresholds between 343 nm and 1030 nm source is small. For the 1030 nm source at a repetition rate of 200 kHz, a good point of comparison with nearly the same laser system as ours is provided in the work of Shaheen et al [37]. They reported a threshold fluence of 0.54 and 2.4 J cm-2 in the two regimes for 20 pulses. This correlates excellently with values obtained for scan speed of 50 mm s-1 where pulse overlap is small (0.25 µm) . For the 1030 nm source,

[PAGE 6] 6 at a repetition rate of 30 kHz, the threshold fluence for gentle ablation is much larger as compared to other two cases. The characteristic depths in the gentle ablation regime are smaller at same speed for this case. Higher threshold fluence and lower characteristic depths do not necessarily mean that ablation rate is reduced. This is because the width of the ablated trench also needs to be considered to calculate the volume removal rate. The width of trench is dependent on the experimental parameters and is discussed in section 3.5. The material removal rates for the 3 cases are presented in section 3.6. Fig. 2. Average trench depth as a function of fluence for 3 cases at different scan speeds (a) source – 343 nm, frep – 200 kHz (b) source – 1030 nm, frep – 200 kHz and (c) source – 1030 nm, frep – 30 kHz. The dashed lines represent the fitting of points into two different regimes with x-intercept being the threshold fluence For the 200 kHz repetition rate cases, average depth measured from axial trench profile starts to decrease at a high fluence. This is observable at speeds of 50 and 70 mm s-1 for 343 nm source and at 50 mm s-1 for 1030 nm source. This is mostly likely due the formation of debris at the bottom of the trench as observed in [23] and supported by explanation given in Appendix A.3. Table 2. Characteristic depth and corresponding threshold fluence in the two regimes for 3 sets of process parameters (repetition rate and wavelength) at 3 scan speeds. The final column contains threshold fluence extracted from recast layer volume in the strong ablation regime Parameter Speed (mm s-1) 𝒍𝒈 ሺ𝝁𝒎) 𝝓𝒕𝒉 𝒈ሺ𝑱𝒄𝒎ି𝟐) 𝒍𝒔ሺ𝝁𝒎) 𝝓𝒕𝒉 𝒔ሺ𝑱 𝒄𝒎ି𝟐) 𝝓𝒕𝒉 𝑽𝒔 ሺ𝑱 𝒄𝒎ି𝟐) =343 nm frep=200 kHz 50 2.34 0.45 8.60 1.62 1.86 70 1.63 0.43 7.72 2.18 2.88 100 1.26 0.45 6.75 2.74 3.61 =1030 nm frep=200 kHz 50 2.53 0.5 11.71 2.58 2.12 70 2.26 0.55 10.81 3.24 4.11 90 1.91 0.55 9.83 4 5.26 =1030 nm frep=30 kHz 30 1.91 1.94 11.12 11.73 6.08 50 1.29 2 5.38 12.25 5.94 90 0.68 2.34 3.07 12.6 2.96