[PAGE 1] Femtosecond laser micromachining for integrated quantum photonics Giacomo Corrielli1,2, Andrea Crespi2,1, and Roberto Osellame1,2,∗ 1Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie, piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy and 2Dipartimento di Fisica, Politecnico di Milano, piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy (Dated: October 13, 2021) Integrated quantum photonics, i.e. the generation, manipulation and detection of quantum states of light in integrated photonic chips, is revolutionizing the ﬁeld of quantum information in all applications, from communications to computing. Although many diﬀerent platforms are being currently developed, from silicon photonics to lithium niobate photonic circuits, none of them has shown the versatility of femtosecond laser micromachining (FLM) in producing all the components of a complete quantum system, encompassing quantum sources, reconﬁgurable state manipulation, quantum memories and detection. It is in fact evident that FLM has been a key enabling tool in the ﬁrst-time demonstration of many quantum devices and functionalities. Although FLM cannot achieve the same level of miniaturization of other platforms, it still has many unique advantages for integrated quantum photonics. In particular, in the last ﬁve years, FLM has greatly expanded its range of quantum applications with several scientiﬁc breakthroughs achieved. For these reasons, we believe that a review article on this topic is very timely and could further promote the development of this ﬁeld by convincing end-users of the great potentials of this technological platform and by stimulating more research groups in FLM to direct their eﬀorts to the exciting ﬁeld of quantum technologies. I. INTRODUCTION Great expectations are currently placed on the sec- ond quantum revolution [1], where quantum technologies promise to dramatically change the way we process infor- mation for practical applications. This revolution encom- passes all aspects of information, from how we retrieve it with sensing, to how we elaborate it through computing and simulation, to the way we transfer it with communi- cations. The focus of the second quantum revolution is mainly on developing new quantum-enabled technologies, in con- trast to the ﬁrst one that mainly aimed at developing new science (to the extent that the two aspects can be consid- ered separately). The emphasis put on practical applica- tions of quantum devices is important to understand the global eﬀort speciﬁcally devoted to advancing the techno- logical aspects. In fact, system scalability and engineer- ing are the most important keywords in evaluating and selecting possible quantum platform. The range of phys- ical systems that are currently available to implement the qubit (the elementary unit of quantum information) are several and very diﬀerent. The most advanced ones include superconducting circuits, trapped ions or atoms, defects in various materials, and photons. Each of them has speciﬁc advantages and disadvantages and lends itself particularly to a speciﬁc task in quantum information. Photonics has unique properties for quantum commu- nications [2], but also has great potentials in sensing [3], simulation [4] and computing [5]. Although amazing re- sults have been achieved with extremely complex bulk ∗Electronic address: roberto.osellame@cnr.it optics set-up [6], user-friendly, scalable, portable and re- liable photonic devices can only be achieved with inte- grated optics. The latter is a well developed approach for applications in classical information and could thus be leveraged for a rapid growth of quantum technologies. However, diﬀerent emphasis is put on some aspects of the photonic circuits by classical and quantum operation. In particular, photon losses (that can be easily compen- sated classically by optical ampliﬁers) are a key aspect for quantum photonics, where the no-cloning theorem means that some information is irreversibly destroyed with each lost photon. In addition, speciﬁc components as single photon sources, memories and detectors need to be de- veloped for a complete quantum photonic system. These aspects motivate on-going and future research in inte- grated quantum photonics. The aim of this review is not to cover the whole ﬁeld of integrated quantum photonics, which has been the topic of a recent review paper [7], but to summarize the contri- bution given to this important ﬁeld by a speciﬁc micro- fabrication technology, i.e. femtosecond laser microma- chining (FLM) of transparent materials [8]. In fact, this technological platform has produced a wealth of new and signiﬁcant contributions to the ﬁeld since the ﬁrst results discussed in a previous review [9]. The article is organized in the following way: Section 2 gives a broader view on integrated quantum photonics, describing the main architecture of a quantum photonic system and the most relevant competitors to FLM for its implementation. Section 3 focuses on FLM and its processing possibilities, from waveguide writing, to selec- tive removal of material, to additive manufacturing at the nano/micro-scale with two-photon polymerization. This unique portfolio of processing capabilities (that can be easily combined) is implemented with the same exper- arXiv:2110.06162v1 [quant-ph] 12 Oct 2021

[PAGE 2] 2 imental setup and can enable unique quantum devices that are detailed in the following sections. Section 4 fo- cuses on the use of FLM to directly fabricate single pho- ton sources in diﬀerent materials. If a source is produced with a diﬀerent technology, FLM can still be useful in de- vising an eﬃcient interconnection of the source with in- tegrated photonic circuits as described in Section 5. Sec- tion 6 deals with the most exploited application of FLM in quantum photonics, i.e. the fabrication of complex in- tegrated photonic circuits for manipulation of quantum states of light, both in static devices and in dynamically- reconﬁgurable ones. Integrated quantum memories, dis- cussed in Section 7, are very important components that received a signiﬁcant boost by the adoption of FLM for rare-earth-doped crystals. Finally, in Section 8 we dis- cuss the perspectives of FLM in combining single-photon detectors with integrated photonic circuits. II. INTEGRATED QUANTUM PHOTONICS Photons are very promising carriers of quantum infor- mation, in fact they can operate at room temperature and can propagate for long distances with very limited interactions with the environment, thus preserving the quantum state for a long time. On the other hand, their main limitations are that they can be lost along their propagation and that they are mainly suitable for linear manipulation (until strong interactions between individ- ual photons become easy to implement [10]). Integrated quantum photonics is the synergic com- bination of quantum photonics with integrated optics [7, 11]. It enables dramatic improvements with respect to bulk optic quantum experiments in terms of compact- ness, scalability, control and phase stability. In addition, integrated quantum photonics enables a seamless connec- tion with optical ﬁbers yielding robust and alignment-free devices that can be ﬁeld-deployable. The importance of integrated quantum photonics is ev- ident for quantum communications where their suitabil- ity as ’ﬂying qubits’ is unique, but they are also ﬁnding increasing importance in all other quantum information tasks. Recent work has shown the possibility to simu- late vibrational quantum dynamics of molecules in in- tegrated photonic circuits [12]. Quantum computation hardware has also been demonstrated in integrated pho- tonics, both at the level of probabilistic two-qubit quan- tum gates [11, 13–15], as well as complex reconﬁgurable linear photonic processors [16, 17]. In particular, dif- ferent variants of measurement-based quantum compu- tation hold promise for fault-tolerant photonic quantum computers [18, 19]. It is worth noting that even when photons are not used as qubits, they are still relevant actors in the quantum architecture, for example in the read out of the state of the quantum system, being it an ion, an atom or a super- conducting circuit; also in this case integrated photonics can play an important role [20, 21]. FIG. 1: A quantum photonic system is typically built of three blocks. A ﬁrst block generates a quantum state |Ψ⟩of one or more photons, which is useful for further elaboration. A second block manipulates the state, most often by means of a linear unitary transformation U. The ﬁnal block performs the detection, which equals to measuring the projection on the elaborated state on one or more quantum states |Φ⟩. A. Architecture for a universal integrated quantum photonic system For most, if not all, applications, a quantum pho- tonic system can be schematized into three main blocks (Fig. 1): the block for the generation of single photons or more complex quantum states of light, the block for the manipulation of the information encoded in such quan- tum states (where the actual quantum protocol is imple- mented) and a ﬁnal block for the measurement through photodetectors. All three block are undergoing a pro- cess of miniaturization and integration to improve their portability and scalability. In particular, a signiﬁcant ef- fort has been devoted to the integration of the second block, where the information is manipulated according to the quantum protocol. A current limitation of quantum photonics is that only linear manipulation of the quantum state is typically vi- able, although nonlinearities can be simulated with mea- surements of ancillary photons in linear circuits [22]. Nevertheless, many tasks can be implemented with linear operations, as well as reaching a computational hardness [23] that recently led to a quantum advantage demonstra- tion [6]. In particular, the time evolution of a quantum system under a given Hamiltonian gives rise to a unitary transformation of the initial state that can be accurately mapped in a linear photonic circuit. Thanks to the ﬁne control of the photonic circuit properties, quantum de- vices implementing speciﬁc unitary transformations can be fabricated, with the possibility of having diﬀerent de- vices for each quantum manipulation task. However, the main trend nowadays is to produce fully reconﬁgurable photonic circuits to implement multiple, arbitrary uni- tary transformations in the same circuit. A ﬁnal comment on the overall architecture, points to the two current alternatives to combine the three blocks in a complete quantum system. One possibility is to com- bine all of them monolithically on a single substrate with signiﬁcant advantages in the long-term for scalability and mass production, but with greater technical diﬃculties in optimizing all the functionalities on the same material. A

[PAGE 3] 3 second possibility is the modular approach, where each block is developed and optimized in a dedicated mod- ule and then the diﬀerent modules are optically intercon- nected. This may prove as an advantageous approach in the short term as it can harvest immediately all the results achieved on the diﬀerent functionalities without having to worry about how to transfer them on the same technological platform. On the other hand, assembly of these modular systems may be complicated and not so easily scalable to very complex devices. B. Available integrated photonic platforms Miniaturization of quantum photonic devices in inte- grated optics can leverage from all the work done in classical photonics for other applications. Diﬀerent in- tegrated photonic platforms have been developed and each of them is being explored for its potential in quan- tum information applications. Each platform has ad- vantages and disadvantages and thus no clear winner is yet established in integrated quantum photonics. Silicon photonics [24], silicon nitride [17], and silica on silicon [11] are well-consolidated platforms, listed according to a decreasing level of miniaturization. Nonclassical single photon sources can be embedded on-chip exploiting non- linear four-wave-mixing processes [24, 25] and supercon- ducting nanowire detectors have been integrated on a few of these platforms [26]. Reconﬁgurability of the photonic circuits is mainly achieved with thermal phase shifters, providing stable but slow phase control. Lithium niobate is another interesting platform as it provides second order nonlinearity and electro-optic properties. Photon sources based on parametric down conversion have been demon- strated on this material [27], as well as very fast phase control [28]. This last platform is also gaining signiﬁcant interest in a new form, i.e. lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI), where the above properties are combined with an increased miniaturization capability [29]. A further integrated photonic platform is femtosecond laser micro- machining (FLM) in transparent materials [8, 9, 30]. Al- though less extreme in terms of device miniaturization if compared to lithographic processes, FLM is a powerful microfabrication technology which shows the distinctive features of three-dimensional capabilities, versatility in terms of kind of processable materials, and rapid proto- typing. In fact, low costs and fast fabrication turnaround times of FLM often allow designing the devices by an it- erative process of fabrication and characterization, rather than relying on complex numerical simulation. This plat- form has enabled many breakthroughs in quantum pho- tonics and it will be discussed more in details in the fol- lowing sections. III. FEMTOSECOND LASER MICROMACHINING In FLM, femtosecond laser pulses are exploited to ma- chine transparent dielectric materials with high spatial resolution in the three dimensions. To the purpose, the femtosecond laser beam is focused by suitable optics (e.g. an aspheric lens or a microscope objective) on the sur- face or into the bulk of the transparent material (Fig. 2a). The high peak intensity, enabled by the combination of short pulse length and tight focusing, triggers nonlinear absorption processes in the transparent material, which can result in a permanent and localized modiﬁcation around the focal region. Three-dimensional machining is achieved by translating the substrate with respect to the laser focus during irradiation, typically by means of high-precision translation stages. The microscopic modiﬁcation processes are complex, and originate from an intricate interplay among diﬀer- ent phenomena, which include electronic excitation or relaxation, and thermal eﬀects [30]. Indeed, modiﬁca- tions can be of diﬀerent nature, encompassing refractive index variations, chemical/structural changes, ablation and creation of micro-voids, depending on the speciﬁc material and of on the adopted irradiation parameters. Generally, for increasing pulse energy, one observe the passage from a regime of smooth modiﬁcation of the opti- cal properties, to the creation of more invasive structural changes, ending with cracks and voids if the deposited energy is too high. It is also noted that, while the nonlinear absorption phenomena that trigger the modiﬁcation process occurs well conﬁned in the focal region, the size of the modiﬁed region can be quite larger, because of the inﬂuence of thermal diﬀusion or accumulation [31]. We will now discuss in more details the processing portfolio of FLM, from waveguide writing to 3D struc- turing, to two-photon polymerization, and will then con- clude emphasising how the speciﬁc features of FLM can be beneﬁcial for integrated quantum photonics. A. Waveguide writing The possibility of producing positive refractive index changes in glass by means of FLM for writing optical channel waveguides has been originally discovered by Davis et al. in 1996 [32]. Since then, numerous research groups worldwide have extensively worked for improv- ing the guiding features of laser-written waveguides in many transparent materials, ranging from various kind of glasses, to dielectric crystalline substrates [8, 33]. In the femtosecond-laser direct-writing process, waveg- uides are deﬁned by translating the substrate at constant speed with respect to the laser focus, according to arbi- trary three-dimensional paths. The optical performance of the fabricated waveguides depends in a non-trivial way on the irradiation parameters and on the speciﬁc

[PAGE 4] 4 substrate. In general, a higher deposited energy (e.g., via a lower translation speed, a higher pulse energy or a higher repetition rate) is typically associated with a larger waveguide cross-section and a higher refractive- index diﬀerence of the modiﬁed region with respect to the pristine material. Typical waveguides fabricated by FLM have a transverse cross section of few µm2 and show a refractive index change between core and cladding in the order of 10−2 −10−3, which reﬂects in their excellent connectivity with standard optical ﬁbers. Waveguide inscription in glass is performed by writ- ing directly the waveguide core, i.e. producing a positive refractive index change with the laser irradiation (type I waveguide, see Fig. 2b,c). The most employed substrates, especially for integrated quantum photonics applications, are pure fused silica and commercial borosilicate glasses, e.g. Corning EagleXG and Eagle2000 or Schott AF32. Single mode waveguides have been fabricated in these materials covering the whole visible and near infrared spectrum of light, from 400 nm, up to the telecom C- band, demonstrating propagation losses in the range 0.1- 1 dB/cm and negligible bending losses for radii above 30 mm [34–36]. The most favorable inscription regime for the processing of pure fused silica is with low repeti- tion rates, from 1 kHz to 100 kHz, and low scan speeds (up to few mm/s). Single-scan waveguides fabricated in fused silica typically present a strongly elongated cross section and a moderate degree of modal birefringence, up to 10−4. Multiple and partially overlapped scans can be employed for engineering the waveguide cross sec- tion, thus producing more circular intensity proﬁles of the guided mode [37]. For the fabrication of waveguides in borosilicate glasses, instead, higher repetition rates (500 kHz to 5 MHz), and scan speeds from 10 mm/s to 100 mm/s are preferred. In this regime, thermal accumula- tion eﬀects importantly contribute to the material modi- ﬁcation [31, 38], resulting in a more symmetric waveguide cross section and low birefringence (in the order of 10−5), mostly given by the residual mechanical stress accumu- lated in the substrate during the fabrication. Recently, it has been demonstrated that a thermal annealing treat- ment performed on borosilicate waveguides after fabrica- tion improves the optical mode conﬁnement, allowing for radii of curvature of 10 mm [39], and quench waveguide birefringence almost completely (in the order of 10−6), thus giving rise to fully polarization insensitive integrated photonic circuits [40]. Concerning the waveguide writing in transparent di- electric crystals, the most commonly adopted approach is that of inscribing by laser irradiation two parallel tracks of damaged and amorphized material, separated by a distance from 10 µm to 30 µm, which form the waveg- uide cladding. Waveguides fabricated in this way are called type II waveguides, and have been demonstrated for a great variety of crystals, including many rare earth doped matrices, several nonlinear crystals and diamond [33]. More complex cladding-irradiation strategies have also been explored, with the aim of improving the ver- tical conﬁnement of the light, or for creating photonic band-gap guiding structures (type III waveguides) [41]. Finally, another possibility for fabricating channel waveg- uides in crystals by FLM consists in fabricating two par- allel ablation trenches at the crystal surface for producing a guiding region between them (Type IV waveguide) [33]. Instead, the creation of a positive refractive index change in crystals, usually associated to a local material densi- ﬁcation, is very hard to achieve with direct laser irradia- tion. Therefore, the demonstration of type I waveguides has been successful only in a limited number of cases, e.g. lithium nibate [42], yttrium orthosilicate [43] and potassium dihydrogen phosphate [44]. Crystal waveguides fabricated by FLM typically show worse optical properties than what attainable in glass, suﬀering from higher propagation losses (¿ 1 dB/cm) and lower light conﬁnement, with guided-mode ﬁeld diame- ters ranging from 10 µm to 20 µm. This holds especially true in the case of type II-IV structures, preventing the use of these kinds of waveguides in curved geometries. Nevertheless, the possibility of writing optical waveguides in crystals remains of very high scientiﬁc interest, includ- ing for integrated quantum photonics applications, be- cause they allow to take advantage of the peculiar phys- ical properties that many transparent dielectric crystals oﬀer. B. 3D microstructuring Femtosecond laser pulses are capable of machining the surface of the dielectric, transparent substrate with ab- lation processes, which are driven by the same nonlinear absorption exploited to inscribe waveguide tracks in the bulk. By focusing the laser beam on the top surface of the substrate it is possible to drill precise holes, or excavate microtrenches. If low pulse-repetition rates are adopted, the ablation process is mainly non-thermal and may yield high resolution and no damage of the surrounding region. However, during the ablation process debris can deposit close to or just upon the ablated region, which makes it diﬃcult to realize clean microstructures. In addition, both the presence of the debris and the presence of the ablated structure itself modify the focusing conditions while the ablation proceeds deeper: this limits the depth and the achievable complexity of the realized structures. An alternative approach is to perform laser ablation with the substrate immersed in water, or simply with water wetting the surface to be machined, and starting from the bottom surface instead of the top one [48]. In this way, while the ablation process proceeds towards the middle of the substrate, the laser beam always propa- gates through the clean substrate volume, without being aﬀected by the microstructure that is being formed. In addition, the presence of water facilitates debris removal and makes it possible to excavate clean microchannels, where water can ﬂow. This water-assisted laser ablation technique has enabled to fabricate microﬂuidic channels

[PAGE 5] 5 Waveguide writing Two-photon polymerization 3D microstructuring a) d) e) g) f) b) c) FIG. 2: Graphical summary of the capabilities of FLM. Irradiation of a transparent substrate with a focused femtosecond laser beam, to produce buried modiﬁed tracks, is represented pictorially in (a); boxes report examples of the diﬀerent available fabrication processes (b-g). For direct waveguide writing, microscope pictures of FLM waveguides in two diﬀerent materials are reported: (b) Single-mode waveguide operating in the visible, realized in fused silica substrate by a single femtosecond laser scan at 50 kHz pulse repetition rate (authors’ own work, scalebar is 10 µm); (c) Single-mode waveguide operating at 1550 nm, inscribed in Eagle2000 (Corning Inc.) alumino-borosilicate glass by multiple overlapped laser scans at 5 MHz, followed by thermal annealing (adapted from Ref. [39], scalebar is 10 µm). For 3D microstructuring, cross-sections of diﬀerent excavated structures, produced by water-assisted laser ablation in EagleXG (Corning Inc.) alumino-borosilicate glass, are reported (both adapted from Ref. [45]): (d) Microtrenches realized on both sides of an optical waveguide (scalebar is 200 µm); (e) U-shaped hollow microstructure, surrounding a thin glass beam where an optical waveguide has also been inscribed (scalebar is 100 µm). For two-photon polymerization, pictures taken with an electronic microscope of fabricated microstructures are shown: (f) Crossed-arc polymeric waveguides, each crossing contains one pre-characterized single-photon emitter (adapted from Ref. [46], scalebar is 20 µm); (g) 3D structure containing several key photonic elements, such as waveguides, couplers and microdisc resonators (adapted from Ref. [47], scalebar is 10 µm). with an articulated path, drawn in the three-dimensions inside the substrate [49]. Hollow chambers connected to the surface only by means of small passages [50], or even microthreads in glass [51] have also been reported. A water-immersion objective can be used conveniently to perform, in the same session, both the inscription of waveguides and the fabrication of hollow microstructures by ablation. Only the irradiation parameters, such as pulse energy and translation speed, need to be changed between one kind of processing and the other, without the need of realigning the sample. Waveguides and mi- crostructures are in this way perfectly positioned one rel- ative to the other. Using this method, mechanical micro- cantilevers have been machined in borosilicate glass, with embedded optical waveguides, to realize optical-intensity modulators and switches working at a frequency of tens of kilohertz [52]. In addition, deep microtrenches and sus- pended glass structures have been incorporated in recon- ﬁgurable waveguide circuits, controlled by thermo-optic phase shifters (see also the discussion in Section 5.2). In this case, the hollow microstructures guide the heat dif- fusion processes inside the substrate and enable a highly eﬃcient thermal control of the circuit [45] (see Fig. 2d,e). A further, widely adopted method to perform fem- tosecond laser-assisted glass microstructuring is the so- called FLICE technique (femtosecond laser irradiation followed by chemical etching), which exploits the en- hanced sensitivity of laser-irradiated regions to chemi- cal etching, in certain materials [53]. According to this method, tracks are irradiated in the bulk glass, terminat- ing at one of the facets of the sample. The glass sample is later immersed in a chemical etching solution, such as an aqueous solution of hydroﬂuoric acid or potassium hydroxide. The etching agent preferentially attacks the irradiated region, giving rise to hollow microstructures along the irradiated lines [54, 55]. As mentioned, this technique does not work well in all kinds of substrate, but preeminently in speciﬁc ma- terials such as fused silica [53, 55]. or photosensitive glass [54] (e.g. Schott Foturan). In these substrates

[PAGE 6] 6 the high etching selectivity enables to machine three- dimensional microstructures with complex shapes. In particular, femtosecond-laser written waveguides with reasonably low losses can also be fabricated in fused sil- ica. It becomes thus possible to realize, in the same irra- diation step and with a simple adjustment of the irradia- tion parameters, both optical waveguides and tracks that will be etched in a subsequent process, forming microﬂu- idic channels that will be intrinsically aligned with the waveguides [56]. This technique have allowed to demon- strate optoﬂuidic devices for sensing or other biological applications[57–60], and even to integrate ﬂuidic func- tionalities within the cladding of silica optical ﬁbers [61]. C. Two-photon polymerization In the previous Sections we have seen how FLM can modify the properties of a transparent material (par- ticularly its refractive index) or can selectively remove arbitrary portions of the material. Here we will see that FLM can also be used for additive manufacturing tasks through a process known as two-photon polymer- ization (2PP) [62]. The fundamental physical mechanism is again based on the exploitation of focused ultrashort pulses to trigger a nonlinear absorption process. How- ever, this time the nonlinear absorption is performed in- side a negative tone photoresist that absorbs in the UV. Using a near-infrared femtosecond laser source, a two- photon absorption process triggers a local photopolymer- ization of the resist. Moving the focus inside the resist it is thus possible to polymerize 3D structures of arbi- trary shape (see Fig. 2f,g), while the unirradiated resin is removed in a subsequent developing step. The nonlin- ear dependence of the absorption process on the intensity proﬁle, as well as the fact that photopolymerization hap- pens only above a given threshold of absorbed energy density, make it possible to achieve sub-diﬀraction-limit feature sizes with a careful tuning of the laser ﬂuence [63]. In addition, it is a maskless process that can be easily combined with preliminary optical inspection of the sample, enabling the possibility of in-situ lithography of photonic structures in speciﬁc locations where, e.g., single photon emitters have been found and character- ized [46]. Finally, although 2PP is applied to photosensi- tive resins, while the previous micromachining processes regard glasses and crystals, all of them can be imple- mented on the same femtosecond laser micromachining equipment, by carefully designing the process workﬂow [64]. D. Advantages of FLM for integrated quantum photonics It is evident from the previous discussion that FLM has many unique features with respect to all the other integrated photonic platforms. Such features have clear advantages also for quantum photonic applications. Let’s ﬁrst discuss the versatility of the process. Not only it encompasses transformative, subtractive and ad- ditive technologies in the same tool, but those technolo- gies can also be easily combined to produce complex 3D quantum devices with a very limited number of process- ing steps as compared to photolithographic technologies. In addition, the versatility also regards the diﬀerent ma- terials that can be processed with FLM. It has been shown that almost all materials have a suitable process- ing window that allow the waveguide writing process. This ﬂips the usual way of thinking in designing a pho- tonic component, i.e. from how to integrate a given functionality in the material of the integrated photonic platform, to ﬁnding the processing window to produce an integrated photonic circuit in the best material for that functionality. Naturally, this approach has a per- fect match with the modular architecture of the quantum system described in Section 2.1, where one can envisage the optical interconnection of separately optimized com- ponents without the constraint of a common substrate material. Focusing more speciﬁcally on the properties of the laser written photonic circuits as compared to the other platforms, we should ﬁrst emphasize that FLM has the unique possibility of writing 3D photonic circuits, while the other technological platforms are mainly conﬁned to 2D layouts. This feature can be exploited in devising more compact devices or in removing the usual limita- tion of ﬁrst-neighbour interaction in designing quantum protocols on a photonic chip. Laser-written waveguides have mode sizes and refrac- tive indices very close to those of optical ﬁbers, therefore extremely low-loss edge coupling can be easily achieved. This is an important feature that further supports a mod- ular architecture. Not only coupling losses are low, but also propagation losses are typically around 0.1 dB/cm or better. The downside of the similarity of the waveg- uide conﬁnement to that of an optical ﬁber is the limited minimum radius of curvature that can be implemented without additional losses. This brings the miniaturiza- tion capability of FLM circuits at the level of the silica- on-silicon platform, but signiﬁcantly worse than most of the alternative ones. Another important advantage of the FLM platform is the low birefringence of the written waveguides and the possibility to produce polarization insensitive couplers. This allows the manipulation of the quantum information encoded in the photons irrespec- tively of their polarization state, while other platforms require a ﬁxed polarization for proper operation. This is a great simpliﬁcation in the global system, in particular in the modular architecture, where it may be complicated to preserve the polarization state in the optical intercon- nections. Finally, all the versatility that we have emphasized has a cost in terms of mass-production capability. In fact, FLM is a serial writing technique and cannot compete with parallel photolithographic microfabrication for very