[PAGE 1] Laser writing of scalable single colour centre in silicon carbide Yu-Chen Chen1*, Patrick S. Salter2, Matthias Niethammer1, Matthias Widmann1, Florian Kaiser1, Roland Nagy1, Naoya Morioka1, Charles Babin1, Jürgen Erlekampf3, Patrick Berwian3, Martin Booth2, Jörg Wrachtrup1 1. 3rd Institute of Physics, University of Stuttgart and Institute for Quantum Science and Technology IQST, Germany 2. Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK 3. Fraunhofer IISB, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany *Corresponding author: y.chen@pi3.uni-stuttgart.de Abstract: Single photon emitters in silicon carbide (SiC) are attracting attention as quantum photonic systems [1-2]. However, to achieve scalable devices it is essential to generate single photon emitters at desired locations on demand. Here we report the controlled creation of single silicon vacancy (VSi) centres in 4H-SiC using laser writing without any post-annealing process. Due to the aberration correction in the writing apparatus and the non-annealing process, we generate single VSi centres with yields up to 30%, located within about 80 nm of the desired position in the transverse plane. We also investigated the photophysics of the laser writing VSi centres and conclude that there are about 16 photons involved in the laser writing VSi centres process. Our results represent a powerful tool in fabrication of single VSi centres in SiC for quantum technologies and provide further insights into laser writing defects in dielectric materials. Introduction Silicon carbide (SiC) is host to many promising colour centres with extremely high brightness [3-7] and long spin coherence time [8-11], showing favourable properties as quantum light sources and providing optical interfaces with electron and nuclear spins. In particular, silicon vacancy (VSi) defects in SiC have shown to be useful for high-precision vector magnetometry [12,13], all-optical magnetometry [14], thermometry [15] and quantum photonics [16,17]. To provide scalable quantum technologies based on VSi centres in SiC, it will be necessary to integrate those systems into nanophotonics and electronics functional structures [8,16,17] with an accuracy of 10 nm - 1 µm. In this regard, focused Si ion and proton beams have been used to engineer VSi centres in SiC with high spatial accuracy [18,19]. However, those methods come at the expense of creating considerable residual lattice damage, which may reduce spin and optical coherence properties. Recently, the laser writing method was successfully implemented to generate single nitrogen vacancy centres in diamond with high positioning accuracy and near-unity yield, while maintaining excellent spin and optical coherence properties [20-22]. Moreover, laser writing method has recently successfully generated VSi centres ensembles in 4H-SiC at various depth [23]. In this work, we apply the laser writing method to fabricate single VSi centres in 4H polytype of SiC with high yield and good optical properties. Due to the combination of nonlinear laser writing process and appropriate aberration correction [20, 21], our method can generate defects at any depth in the crystal and with a spatial resolution beyond the optical diffraction limit. We also discuss the mechanism of the laser writing process. Main text

[PAGE 2] Our host material is a 4H-SiC epitaxial layer that was grown along c-axis in an Epigress CVD reactor (VP508) at 1625 °C with nitrogen doping of 1 × 1015 𝑐𝑚−3 and the a thickness of 62 𝜇𝑚 on an 4° off-axis 4H-SiC substrate. Then, the sample was oxidized in oxygen atmosphere at 1300 °C for 5.5 hours and subsequently annealed in Argon atmosphere at 1500 °C to minimize the carbon vacancy (VC) concentration. Figure 1. Generation of VSi centres using laser writing. (a) PL image of Array A immediately after laser processing. The laser pulse energy increases from the bottom to the top of the image and the range of the laser pulse energy used are provided on the left of the figure. The red line at the pulse energy of 12.6 nJ indicates the pulse energy threshold to generate colour centres in all 20 repeats. (b) Typical spectrum at 4.2 K of the features generated with laser pulse energy lower than 12.6 nJ, which indicates the generation of hexagonal lattice site VSi centres (V1’). (c) Typical ODMR signal of the laser written VSi centres ensemble at room temperature, revealing cubic lattice site VSi centres (V2). (d) Typical background-corrected excitation power dependent fluorescence of laser written single VSi centre. The linearly increasing background fluorescence was recorded by when being aligned for away from the emitter. We characterized the sample via photoluminescence (PL) detection using a confocal microscope arrangement (see Supporting information). Our initial PL scans of the sample allowed us to identify large regions without ‘native’ VSi centres, which were subsequently chosen to conduct the laser writing experiments. Single writing pulses of wavelength 790 nm and duration 250 fs were delivered to each site in 40 x 20 square grids with a pitch of 5 µm at a depth of 20 µm. Along the vertical axis of the grids, the pulse energy, Ep, was varied from 6.7 nJ to 89.4 nJ to generate incremental degrees of damage to the lattice (see Supporting Information for more details). Along the horizontal axis, 20 identical pulses were delivered to perform statistics for each pulse energy. In this paper, this array is labelled as Array A. Additionally, we also generated a second array at a deeper depth of 40 µm with

[PAGE 3] single writing pulses for each site to demonstrate the 3D ability of laser writing (see Figure S2 in Sporting Information). This deeper array will be called Array B. Figure 1a shows a PL image of Array A immediately after laser writing without annealing or other treatments. Since the size of Array A is much larger than the scan range of our confocal microscope, we only show the PL image of the area exposed to the laser pulse energy from 7.4 to 15.6 nJ in Figure 1a (from bottom to top). At a threshold pulse energy of 𝐸𝑝≥12.6 𝑛𝐽 fluorescence was observed at each site (red line in Figure 1a). As 𝐸𝑝decreases from 12.6 nJ, the probability for defect generation among 20 repeats drops. Furthermore, no visible fluorescent sites are observed for 𝐸𝑝≤ 8.2 𝑛𝐽. These findings indicate that the average number of colour centres’ per site decrease as a function of laser pulse energy. Figure 1b shows the typical emission spectrum of a laser written feature at 4.2 K. The spectrum shows a sharp peak at 858.7 nm with roughly 100 nm wide phonon side band, which corroborates the generation of hexagonal lattice site silicon carbide centres [24]. Note that the sharp peak at 858.7 nm corresponds to the optical transition between the ground state and the second excited state V1’ of the VSi centre [25]. Since in our optical arrangement, we collect fluorescence almost parallel to the c-axis of 4H-SiC, we cannot observe emission from the first excite state V1, whose dipole orientation is parallel to the c-axis [24,25]. For the same reason, we do also not observe emission from cubic lattice site VSi centres (V2). They are even not seen in the spectrum of the heavy damage alignment markers (see Supporting Information), as shown in Figure S4 in the Supporting Information. At sites fabricated with high laser pulse energy, there may be many V2 VSi centres generated, but their emission is weak and covered by the V1’ emission. However, due to the different zero-field splitting energies of V1 and V2 VSi centres, the optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) measurements can distinguish the emission of V2 from V1 VSi centres. The ODMR measurements were performed on the laser written VSi centres ensemble at room temperature. 6 out of 10 sites written with 𝐸𝑝≥22.7 𝑛𝐽 show a clear ODMR signal at around 70 MHz at zero external field indicating the existence of V2 VSi centres by its characteristic zero field splitting, as shown in Figure 1c. The red line is the best fit to a Gaussian function, giving the peak position at 71.5 ± 0.41 MHz. The observed side peaks are due to a small inhomogeneous parasitic magnetic field from the experimental apparatus [13]. Figure 1d shows the excitation power dependent fluorescence intensity for a single hexagonal site VSi centre at room temperature. The intensity 𝐼(𝑃) can be described by the formula 𝐼(𝑃) = 𝑃𝐼𝑠𝑎𝑡 𝑃+ 𝑃𝑠𝑎𝑡 , (1) where 𝐼𝑠𝑎𝑡 is the saturation intensity and 𝑃𝑠𝑎𝑡 is the saturation power of the emitter. The red line in Figure 1d is the best fit to Equation (1), giving 𝐼𝑠𝑎𝑡= 4526 ± 17 counts/s and 𝑃𝑠𝑎𝑡= 1.00 ± 0.02 mW. Note that 𝐼𝑠𝑎𝑡 is 2 to 3 times lower than previously reported values, which is due to the deep location of the laser written VSi centres [8, 19, 26]. We expect similar PL intensity when the defects are created more shallow (few µm below surface).

[PAGE 4] Figure 2. Statistics of VSi centres generation using laser processing. (a) Typical 𝑔(2)(𝛿𝑡) histogram from single VSi centre after background removal at room temperature. (b) Map of the number of VSi centres generating at different sites in Array A. ‘Dead’ refers to the centres which photobleached during 𝑔(2)(𝛿𝑡) measurements. (c) Plot of the number of single (green), double (yellow), triple (red), and 4 or 5 (purple) VSi centres generated in each row of 20 repeats as a function of laser pulse energy measured before the objective lens in the writing apparatus. The total number generated per row is presented in black. Photon autocorrelation measurements (see Methods) were conducted for each site with 𝐸𝑝≤ 11.6 𝑛𝐽 in Array A to determine the number of VSi centres. Since the detected PL count rate is low (4- 14 kcounts/s), the background fluorescence (about 1.0 kcounts/s) needs to be accounted for in the second order autocorrelation histogram 𝑔(2)(𝛿𝑡) (see Method for detail). Fig 2a shows a typical data set displaying a distinct photon anti-bunching at δt = 0 with 𝑔(2)(𝛿𝑡) = 0.040 ± 0.003, which stands as a clear characteristic of a single colour centre. In addition, for |𝛿𝑡| > 16.5 ns we observe a significant bunching behaviour, which is typical for a three-level like the one investigated here (see Method). Figure 2b shows a spatial map of the VSi populations per laser writing site of Array A. In spots that have been created using lower pulse energies, all VSi centres are optically stable. At sites 𝐸𝑝> 10.7 𝑛𝐽, 2 to 3 laser written VSi centres among 20 repeats were photobleached after a few hours optical excitation and 1 to 2 VSi centres showed blinking behaviour. Combining these observations, we suggest that the optical instability may be attributed to the charge transfer from the VSi centres to other laser generated defects in the vicinity, such as carbon vacancies (VC), C interstitial and Si interstitial defects. To our best knowledge, these phenomena were not observed in VSi centres generated by electron irradiation. A likely explanation is that, in laser writing, there is a higher chance of creating the VC centres, C interstitial and Si interstitial defects in the vicinity of the VSi centres, as the laser energy is focused into a small volume around the position where the VSi centre is generated. Oshima et al proposed that the post irradiation annealing may be able to remove unwanted defects and stabilize the VSi centres [27]. The optical stability of laser written VSi centres may be improved by adjusting the n-doping level [28]. Although some VSi centres are not optically stable, at 10.7 nJ, 6 out of 20 sites revealed an optically stable single VSi, corresponding to a probability of 30%. Figure 2c shows the statistics of each row in Array A as a function of the laser writing pulse energy. Here, the number of VSi centres in photobleached sites is estimated from the initial PL count rate. The total number of VSi centres generated per row shows a systematic increase with the laser pulse energy. The probability of fabricating single VSi centres also increases with writing pulse energy and reaches its maximum at after a pulse energy of 10.7 nJ. The number of multiple VSi centres per row increase with pulse energy, as well.

[PAGE 5] Figure 3. Nonlinearity of the laser writing process. (a) Statistical distribution of the number of the VSi centres per laser writing site at laser pulse energy of 10.7 nJ. The probability value is the ratio between the number of site for each case of number of VSi per site and 20 repeats. (b) The average number of the VSi centres per laser writing site among 20 repeats as a function of laser pulse energy. In the following, we discuss the mechanism of laser writing of the VSi centres in SiC. First, we consider the statistics of the distribution of the population of VSi centres per site for 20 repeats for each writing pulse energy. Figure 3(a) shows the results of sites written with a pulse energy of 10.7 nJ, as an example. The red line in Figure 3(a) is a least-squares fit of the Poisson distribution function, 𝑃𝜆(𝑘) = 𝜆𝑘𝑒−𝜆 𝑘! . Here 𝜆 is the average number of VSi centres per site and 𝑘 is the number of VSi centres generated per site. At writing pulse energy of 10.7 nJ, the Poisson distribution fit gives 𝜆= 0.88 ± 0.08. The mean value for generated VSi from the Poisson fits is plotted in Figure 3b as a function of writing pulse energy with the error bars representing the fitting error. Note that any laser generated VSi centres which may have been present but in the wrong charge state at the beginning or were photobleached during PL scan are not taken into account. Thus, our data analysis represents a lower limit case. In the region between 8.6 and 9.4 nJ, the average number of generated VSi centres remains constant, possibly because there are not enough repeats to sufficiently evaluate them statistically. For this reason, we exclude the first two data points in the following analysis. The average number of VSi centres per site exponentially increases with the writing pulse energy at 𝐸𝑝> 9.4 𝑛𝐽, which is similar to laser writing defect generation in diamond [29]. Lagomarsino et al in ref 28 demonstrated that the dominant free electrons generation mechanism at low writing pulse energy is multiphoton ionization (MPI). Thus, we think that the MPI can describe the mechanism of the laser writing VSi centres as the writing pulse energy is lower than 12 nJ (see Supporting Information). The photonionization rate of MPI can be expressed as 𝑃(𝐸) = 𝜎𝑘𝐸𝑝𝑘, (2) where 𝜎𝑘 is the multiphoton absorption coefficient for the absorption of 𝑘 photons and 𝐸𝑝 is the writing pulse energy [30]. The red line in Figure 3b is the least-squares fit of Equation (2), giving 𝑘= 15.5 ± 1.2. In other words, each photon in the 790 nm laser pulse possesses an energy of 1.57 eV, implying that energy is transferred to the SiC lattice in packets of 24.33 ± 1.88 eV. The displacement threshold energy for Si atom in SiC is approximately 25 eV [31], which falls within the error bar of our result. Note that the 15.5 photon absorption obtained here is the nonlinearity of vacancy generation instead of the free electron generation in ref 29. To date, it remains still unclear how the free electrons convert to defects for ultrafast laser pulse writing in wide bandgap materials. The

[PAGE 6] nonlinearity analysis merely provides an insight into certain aspects of the mechanism for defects generation in SiC. Figure 4. Positioning accuracy of the VSi centres generation using laser processing. (a) Histogram of the displacement in the image plane for the VSi centres. The data are fitted with a Rayleigh distribution function. (b) Scatter plot of the fitted positions of the VSi centres relative to the theoretical grid points in the image plane. The dashed circle represents the mean displacement obtained from fitting in (a). For applications, it is important that the VSi centres can be accurately positioned in 3D in order to integrate them into other device architectures. The precision with which we can position VSi centres in the image plane was obtained by fitting a 2D Gaussian surface to the measured intensity distribution of each laser written VSi centre. The theoretical grid points were determined by conducting a least-squares fit of a regular square grid with 5 µm grid length to laser written VSi centres’ positions using fitting parameters of displacement in x and y. The obtained displacements between the VSi centres and the theoretical grid points are plotted as a histogram in Figure 4a. The blue line is the best fit to a Rayleigh distribution, giving a mean displacement of 80 ± 9 nm. Figure 4b shows the spatial distribution of the VSi centres’ positions relative to their theoretical grid points and the dashed circle is the mean displacement. The mean displacement is a factor of 3.7 smaller than the diffraction limited width of the focal spot of the writing laser (see Supporting Information), which underlines the great potential of the laser writing method to precisely generate on-demand defects in photonic structures. The nonlinearity of the MPI mechanism is expected to result in vacancy creation within a region smaller than the focal volume estimated by the field intensity 𝐼(𝑟, 𝑧) (Equation S1 in Supporting Information). According to MPI model, the spatial distribution function for vacancy generation via a y-photon absorption process is dependent on 𝐼𝑦(𝑟, 𝑧) and the corresponding full width at half maximum (FWHM) in radial and axial directions are given by 𝑑𝑦= 𝜔0√2𝑙𝑛2 𝑦 , 𝐿𝑦= 2𝑧𝑅√2 1 𝑦−1. (3) In the previous section, we have demonstrated that 15.5 photons are involved in the vacancy generation process. As a result, the 𝑑15.5 and 𝐿15.5 are corresponding to 88.8 and 364.4 nm,