[PAGE 1] FEMTOSECOND LASER WRITTEN DIAMOND WAVEGUIDES: A STEP TOWARDS INTEGRATED PHOTONICS IN THE FAR INFRARED VIBHAV BHARADWAJ1,*, YUCHEN WANG1,2, TONEY TEDDY FERNANDEZ1,3, ROBERTA RAMPONI1,2, SHANE M. EATON1,2, GIANLUCA GALZERANO1,2 1 Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN) – Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy 2 Dipartimento di Fisica - Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy 3 Present affiliation: MQ Photonics - Department of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie University, North Ryde NSW 2109, Australia *Corresponding author: vibhavbharadwaj@gmail.com Abstract A first demonstration and complete characterization of mid-infrared waveguides in single crystal diamond are reported. Waveguides were designed for 2.4 µm and 8.6 µm waveguiding, with their group velocity dispersion analyzed using femtosecond pulses at 2.4 µm wavelength propagated through the waveguide and the bulk substrate. The total dispersion was found to be dominated by the bulk material rather than the waveguide, and was on the range of 275 fs2/mm, demonstrating that femtosecond laser written modifications in diamond introduce negligible perturbations to the pristine material. Keywords: Diamond photonics; Diamond machining; mid- and far-infrared photonics; Laser materials processing; Femtosecond phenomena;

[PAGE 2] 1. Introduction Diamond is a supreme material, considering its excellent physical, chemical and optical properties due to its strong and dense tetrahedral covalent bonds that are highly structured to form a cubic lattice. The optical transparency offered by diamond is one of the widest in naturally occurring materials, extending from the UV region (~225 nm) to terahertz (THz) frequencies and even beyond into the microwave region (~8000 µm). Additionally, diamond has low group velocity dispersion from the mid-IR region up to THz region1, thus projecting itself as a suitable platform for integrated photonics over a broad wavelength range. The mid-IR region of the electromagnetic spectrum, from 2 to 20 m, has been shown as a promising wavelength range for molecular spectroscopy and sensing2,3 enabling the identification and classification of analytes with ultra-high precision and rapidness with non- ionizing and non-invasive/minimally invasive techniques. Additionally, the earth’s atmosphere shows broad transmission windows in this spectral region, allowing the use of mid-IR wavelengths for remote sensing and optical radar4,5 as well as astrophotonic applications6,7. A suitable platform is crucial for the technological development of integrated mid-IR photonics. Materials like chalcogenide glasses8, fluoride glasses9, zinc selenide and sulfide10, silver halide11 and tellurium halides12 have been researched upon due to their wide transparency in the mid-IR wavelengths. Recently we have reported the fabrication of optical waveguides in bulk single-crystal diamond using femtosecond laser writing technology, which has opened up the prospect of a three-dimensional, integrated quantum photonics platform13. Femtosecond laser writing of nitrogen vacancies (NV) into diamond to produce optically coherent NV− color centers at desired locations14-16 and laser written optical waveguides in diamond that could be used to excite and collect light from those single NVs16 were also demonstrated recently. Wavelength selective reflective elements such as Bragg waveguides have also been laser-fabricated in the bulk of diamond allowing the ability to create cavities for Raman laser applications in the mid-IR wavelengths17. In addition, diamond being a bio-inert material is a suitable substrate for in-situ bio-chemical sensing applications18. The availability of 3D laser

[PAGE 3] written diamond waveguides would provide the strong backbone to extend its usage also in the far infrared and the THz region for an all-optical device. In this paper, we fabricate mid-IR waveguides in single crystal diamond for the first time. The laser written waveguides were designed to operate at 2.4 µm and 8.6 µm wavelengths. Their single mode operation and loss characterization were carried out and then using a Kerr-lens-mode-locked (KLM) Cr:ZnSe laser ultrashort pulses, the waveguides were characterized for their group velocity dispersion performance. 2. Experimental fabrication and characterization Polished 5 mm × 5 mm × 0.5 mm synthetic single-crystal diamond samples (type II, optical grade with nitrogen impurities ~100 part per billion) were acquired from MB Optics. The femtosecond laser used for waveguide writing in diamond was a regeneratively amplified Yb:KGW system (Pharos, Light Conversion) with 230-fs pulse duration at 515-nm wavelength (frequency doubled) and a repetition rate of 500 kHz, focused with a 1.25-NA oil immersion lens (RMS100X-O 100 × Olympus Plan Achromat Oil Immersion Objective). Laser-inscribed structures were characterized for their morphology using white-light optical microscopy in transmission mode with 10× and 40× magnification objectives (Eclipse ME600, Nikon). The structures were formed at 50 µm depth, as measured from the surface to the midpoint of the vertically elongated tracks. Type II waveguides were designed and fabricated in which two modification lines were laser written with a suitable spacing that enabled light to be guided between them. Total average power of the laser was varied between 75 – 100 mW. The separation between the modification lines was 18 – 35 µm. In all cases the scan speed was 0.5 mm/s. The waveguide performance and their losses were tested for two sets of laser wavelengths in the mid-IR regime: at 2.4 µm using a home built Cr:ZnSe laser19

[PAGE 4] and at 8.6 µm by means of a continuous wave (CW) quantum cascade laser (QCL). Figure 1 shows the experimental setup for the diamond waveguide characterization. Figure 1: Experimental setup for diamond waveguide characterization. CW QCL: continuous-wave quantum cascade laser; KLM Cr:ZnSe: Kerr-lens-mode-locked Cr:ZnSe laser. At 2.4 µm wavelength the waveguide showed single mode guidance for type II track separations of 30 – 45 µm, and powers between 75 – 100 mW. The best waveguide showed propagation losses of 6 dB/cm for 30 µm separation and 75 mW average power. The optical microscope image of the waveguide is shown in Fig. 2. The structure had dimensions of 6 µm × 23 µm with the strong vertical elongation due to spherical aberration. The optical mode was profiled using a mid-IR camera (WinCamD-FIR2-16-HR, DataRay). Figure 2: Optical microscope image of the transverse view of the Type II waveguide along with the guided mode at 2.4 µm wavelength.

[PAGE 5] The losses were quite similar at 8.6 µm wavelength albeit the mode sizes were larger for the single mode waveguides. The best transmission was obtained for the waveguide fabricated with 85 mW average power and 40 µm track separation. The cross sectional microscope image of the waveguide and its guided mode are shown in Fig. 3. It was previously demonstrated that stresses were responsible for the waveguiding behavior for visible-guiding waveguides, having a smaller track separation of 13 m19. The mechanisms responsible for waveguiding in diamond in the mid-IR for the larger track separations of 30-40 m reported here are still under investigation. Figure 3: Optical microscope image of the transverse view of the Type II waveguide along with the guided mode at 8.6 µm wavelength. Thanks to the availability of a KLM Cr:ZnSe laser that generates pulse trains at 2.4 µm with of pulse duration of few-optical cycles20, the group delay dispersion characteristics of the diamond waveguides were studied by coupling transform-limited pulses and measuring the output pulse duration and chirp using an interferometric autocorrelation based on two-photon absorption in an InGaAs photodiode (cutoff wavelength 1.7 μm) as shown in Fig. 1. This chirp is due to a collective contribution from the material and the waveguide dispersion.

[PAGE 6] The same pulse was sent through the bulk crystal of the same length to measure the dispersion contribution from the material and thereby deducing the waveguide dispersion. The interferometric autocorrelations measured at the waveguide input (a) and output (b), and at the diamond crystal output after propagation through the bulk crystal (c) are shown in Fig. 4. The interferometric autocorrelation of the input pulse train, Fig. 4(a), is characterized by a peak-to-background ratio 8:1 and a coherence peak duration of 80 fs and a negligible pulse chirp, corresponding to a transform limited pulse duration of 52 fs. When the pulses propagate through the diamond crystal, Fig. 4(b) and 4(c), the corresponding interferometric autocorrelations show a slightly shorter coherence peak longer pulse durations and base line distortions, clear indications that the pulses are now chirped. In the case of propagation in the bulk diamond crystal, the intensity autocorrelation trace, blue curve in Fig. 4(b), is characterized by a duration of 116 fs, with a group delay dispersion of |1375| fs2, corresponding to a material group velocity dispersion of |275| fs2/mm. When the pulse train propagated through the diamond waveguide, Fig. 4(c), the duration of the intensity autocorrelation (green curve) is 99 fs, slightly less compared to bulk propagation. The group velocity dispersion is |190| fs2/mm for the waveguide. Femtosecond laser inscription in diamond could induce the of graphitic phases or other allotropes of carbon which can produce undesired effects in the waveguiding operation. The negligible group velocity dispersion arising from the waveguide structure indicates that those detrimental factors are minimal and do not produce any significant impact on the waveguide based applications of diamond.