[PAGE 1] Integrated waveguides and deterministically positioned nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond created by femtosecond laser writing J. P. HADDEN,1, a) V. BHARADWAJ,2, a) B. SOTILLO,2 S. RAMPINI,2 R. OSELLAME,2 J. WITMER,1, b) H. JAYAKUMAR,1, c) T. T. FERNANDEZ,2 A. CHIAPPINI,3 C. ARMELLINI,3 M. FERRARI,3 R. RAMPONI,2 P. E. BARCLAY,1 and S. M. EATON2 (Corresponding author: jpe.hadden@gmail.com) 1)Institute for Quantum Science and Technology, University of Calgary, Calgary, T2N 1N4, Canada. 2)Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie-Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (IFN-CNR) and Dipartimento di Fisica - Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, Milano, 20133, Italy 3)Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN-CNR), CSMFO and FBK-CMM, Via alla Cascata, 56/C, Trento, 38123, Italy (Dated: 1 November 2021) Diamond’s nitrogen vacancy (NV) center is an optically active defect with long spin coherence times, showing great potential for both eﬃcient nanoscale magnetometry and quantum information processing schemes. Recently, both the formation of buried 3D optical waveguides and high quality single NVs in diamond were demonstrated using the versatile femtosecond laser-writing technique. However, until now, combin- ing these technologies has been an outstanding challenge. In this work, we fabricate laser written photonic waveguides in quantum grade diamond which are aligned to within micron resolution to single laser-written NVs, enabling an integrated platform providing deterministically positioned waveguide-coupled NVs. This fabrication tech- nology opens the way towards on-chip optical routing of single photons between NVs and optically integrated spin-based sensing. a)These authors contributed equally to this publication b)Currently at Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA c)Currently at Department of Physics, City University of New York (CUNY)-City College of New York, New York, NY 10031, USA 1 arXiv:1701.05885v7 [quant-ph] 12 Mar 2018

[PAGE 2] Diamond’s negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy (NV) color center is a point defect con- sisting of a nearest-neighbor subsitutional nitrogen atom and a lattice vacancy. These opti- cally active defects have long room temperature spin coherence times, making them promis- ing for nanoscale magnetic ﬁeld sensing1 and for quantum information processing systems2. An integrated photonics platform in diamond would be beneﬁcial for quantum computing based on optically entangled NVs interacting via optical waveguides, as well as NV-based optically detected spin sensing application, due to the integration and stability provided by monolithic optical waveguides3. Waveguides and other planar photonic structures in diamond have previously been demonstrated within membranes produced using ion implantation assisted lift oﬀmethods4, plasma etching5, or with under cutting performed through focused ion beam milling6, angled reactive ion etching7, or quasi-isotropic etching8. However these techniques are restricted to 2D geometries, and up to now device lengths of up to ∼100 µm. Recently, the versa- tile femtosecond laser microfabrication method was used to demonstrate buried 3D optical waveguides in diamond9,10, a key step towards a diamond photonics platform. However, for practical implementation of quantum information systems and high spatial resolution magnetometry devices, deterministic placement of NVs is required. The most widely used method to place NV centers in diamond relies on ion implantation followed by annealing11,12. This method oﬀers submicron spatial accuracy and signiﬁcant progress has been made in the development of annealing processes to repair unwanted damage to the lattice which can degrade the NV centers properties, especially for shallow centers13,14. However the increased energy required for deeper NV creation causes even more damage15, thus techniques which place NV centers in buried structures with minimal damage are preferable. In 2013, it was shown that NV centers could be produced in optical grade diamond by exploiting the electron plasma created by femtosecond laser pulses focused just above the diamond surface16. This technique however was limited to near-surface placement of NVs and caused ablative damage of the diamond surface. Recently, Chen et al. demonstrated a signiﬁcant improvement, with on-demand and high quality single NVs written in the bulk of quantum grade diamond (nitrogen concentration of <5 ppb) using femtosecond laser writing with a spatial light modulator (SLM) to correct for aberrations followed by high temperature annealing17,18. In this Letter, we apply femtosecond laser writing to inscribe buried optical waveguides 2

[PAGE 3] and to create single NVs within quantum grade diamond. Crucially, we ﬁnd that the optical waveguide remains even after the high temperature sample annealing required to form single NVs. Since the same laser and positioning system are used to form both the waveguide and NVs, they may be aligned to within micron resolution. We further demonstrate waveguide excitation and collection of light from laser-formed single NVs. Such waveguide coupled NVs could open the door to more sophisticated quantum photonic networks in diamond, exploiting optically linked single NVs for single photon sources or solid state qubits19–21. In higher nitrogen content diamond, laser writing of high density NV ensembles within waveguides could enable robust excitation and collection of the ﬂuorescence signal for spin based sensing22–24. Waveguides were written in quantum grade diamond using a regeneratively ampliﬁed Yb:KGW system with 230 fs pulse duration, 515 nm wavelength and 500 kHz repetition rate, focussed with a 1.25 NA objective25. Figure 1 shows an overhead schematic (a) and optical microscope image (b) of the waveguide-NV optical device. Because focused femtosecond laser pulses yield amorphization and graphitization in crystalline diamond, the type II geometry26 was adopted, where two closely spaced laser-written modiﬁcation lines separated by 13 µm provide optical conﬁnement. The conﬁnement mechanism has been shown to be reduction of the refractive index within the modiﬁcation lines which provides lateral conﬁnement, with the introduction of stress within the waveguide itself which provides polarization dependent vertical conﬁnement27. Modiﬁcation lines spanning the 2 mm sample were written with 60 nJ pulse energy and 0.5 mm/s scan speed leading to single mode guiding in the visible. Multiple test devices were written to calibrate the depth and pulse energy of NV formation, however here we focus on a single waveguide with NV centers created near the waveguide depth. The mode ﬁeld diameter (MFD) for the nearly circular TM mode was 9.5 µm at 635 nm wavelength (Fig. 1(c)) and the insertion loss was 5.4 dB. Accounting for the coupling loss and the Fresnel loss due to the refractive index mismatch, we infer a propagation loss of 4.2 dB/cm. These particular optical waveguides are linear, therefore the achievable bend loss has not been measured, however Courvoisier et al. showed a 3 dB bend loss for 25 mm bend radius using a similar laser writing method10. Future studies will seek to form curved waveguide structures such as directional couplers, and to characterize and optimize their bend loss. Using the same femtosecond laser setup, single-pulse exposures were inscribed within 3

[PAGE 4] NV2 NV4 (b) (c) 10 µm Markers 13 µm (a) NV1 NV2 NV3 NV4 NV5 20 µm FIG. 1. Device overview and waveguide output mode. (a) Overhead schematic of the central 80 µm of the waveguide-NV device. (b) Overhead optical microscope image of the full 2 mm waveguide, with zoom-in of the central 80 µm. (c) End view optical microscope image of type II waveguide facet with overlaid 635 nm mode proﬁle. the optical waveguide to induce vacancies in the diamond lattice. Five identical single- pulse exposures (28 nJ) separated by 20 µm were written in each device in order to study reproducibility in forming single NV centers within the waveguiding region. Markers visible in our imaging system were inscribed outside of the waveguide to locate the single pulse exposures, which are not visible to wide-ﬁeld illuminated optical microscopy. The diamond sample was subsequently annealed at 1000 ◦C for 3 hours in a nitrogen atmosphere in order to form NV centers and anneal out other detrimental vacancy complexes12–14. Crucially for the NV-waveguide device targeted in this work, we found that the mode proﬁle and insertion loss of the annealed waveguides in diamond were unaltered. For more details on device fabrication and annealing see Supplementary Material25. Initial overhead photoluminescence (PL) characterization of the laser-written NV centers and their interaction with the waveguide was performed using a homebuilt confocal micro- scope (as shown in Fig. 2(a), and described in detail in Supplementary Material25). The setup allows for 532 nm laser excitation from overhead, focused through the microscope ob- jective or through a butt-coupled single mode ﬁber coupled to the waveguide, while emitted light which is separated from the excitation using a dichroic beam splitter and interference ﬁlters can be detected and analyzed using single photon counting detectors, a spectrometer 4

[PAGE 5] (a) 1 µm 1E3 1E4 1E5 Count Rate [s-1] 650 700 750 Wavelength [nm] 0 1E3 2E3 3E3 Intensity [counts] 0 100 200 300 Delay Time τ [ns] 0 0.5 1 1.5 g(2)(τ) (b) (c) (d) Confocal PL Scan Spectrum Autocorrelation Y X FIG. 2. Overhead confocal characterization. (a) Schematic of experimental setup. (b) PL intensity map showing NV2 within waveguide. (c) PL spectrum showing NV ZPL at 637 nm and PSB at longer wavelengths. (d) NV intensity autocorrelation revealing single photon emission. or a back-illuminated EMCCD from overhead or from the other end of the waveguide. An overhead PL confocal scan of the NV2 trial region (positioned as shown in Fig. 2(b)) shows a bright spot corresponding to an NV center between the two bright laser modiﬁed lines. Two of the ﬁve static exposures in this study (NV2 and NV4) displayed such bright spots after annealing. The single NV formation probability at 28 nJ pulse energy including additional 5

[PAGE 6] trials in other waveguides was 31 ± 9 % which is consistent with previous work17. The alignment of the NV centers close to the center of the optical waveguide is important in order for them to be well coupled. We estimate that both NV2 and NV4 are ∼1 µm shallower than the center of laser-modiﬁed lines based on the confocal signal and hence the optical mode. We selected NV2 for waveguide coupling experiments as its lateral position (shifted by 0.7 ± 0.3 µm from the center of the waveguide, shown in Fig. 2(b)) is better centered compared to NV4 (shifted by 0.9 ± 0.3 µm). The ∼1 µm shift of the NV2 and NV4 is larger than the maximum shifts of ∼600 nm reported previously17, which we attribute to the larger focal volume provided by our femtosecond beam delivery setup. All measurements reported below refer to NV2. Figure 2(c) shows the PL spectrum recorded from the NV with the 650 nm long-pass ﬁlter removed, where the characteristic zero phonon line (ZPL) at 637 nm and the broadband phonon side band (PSB) are clearly visible. An intensity autocorrelation measurement g(2)(τ) of this is shown in Fig. 2(d), with g(2)(0) well below 0.5, characteristic of single photon emission. In order to demonstrate the ability to guide 532 nm excitation light through the waveguide to the NV center, the output from the excitation laser was coupled to the laser-written waveguide by butt-coupling a bare single mode ﬁber (460HP, Thorlabs) to the input facet of the diamond waveguide as shown in Fig. 2(a). Index matching oil was used to improve the transmission and coupling stability. A fraction of the light within the waveguide undergoes Raman scattering, with the ﬁrst order Raman scattered light shifted to 572 nm. Some of this scattered light is emitted out of the waveguide, and can be detected through the confocal microscope’s collection arm with the 650 nm long-pass ﬁlter removed in order to image the guiding properties of the waveguide. Figure 3(a) shows an overhead collection scan of the waveguide, revealing the Raman scattering due to the waveguided excitation light. The waveguide alignment was optimized by monitoring the output intensity at the output facet of the waveguide using a 0.42 NA objective (50× Plan Apo SL Inﬁnity Corrected, Mitutoyo) coupled to a CCD. Waveguide coupled excitation of the NV center is demonstrated in Fig. 3(b) and (c), with collection of the NV center’s emitted light through the overhead confocal microscope. An overhead confocal collection scan of a small area around NV2 with waveguide excitation shows ﬂuorescence from the expected NV position (Fig. 3(b)). Veriﬁcation is achieved by 6