[PAGE 1] Diamond Channel-Cut Crystals for High-Heat-Load, Beam-Multiplexing, Narrow-Band X-ray Monochromators Yuri Shvyd’ko,1, ∗Sergey Terentyev,2 Vladimir Blank,2 and Tomasz Kolodziej1, 3 1Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA 2Technological Institute for Superhard and Novel Carbon Materials, 142190 Troitsk, Russian Federation 3National Synchrotron Radiation Centre SOLARIS, 30-392 Krakow, Poland Next-generation, high-brilliance x-ray photon sources call for new x-ray optics. Here we demon- strate the feasibility of using monolithic diamond channel-cut crystals as high-heat-load, beam- multiplexing, narrow-band, mechanically-stable x-ray monochromators with high-power x-ray beams at cutting-edge, high-repetition-rate x-ray free-electron laser (XFEL) facilities. The diamond channel-cut crystals fabricated and characterized in these studies are designed as two-bounce Bragg reﬂection monochromators directing 14.4-keV or 12.4-keV x-rays within a 15-meV-bandwidth to 57Fe or 45Sc nuclear resonant scattering experiments, respectively. The crystal design allows out-of- band x-rays within a ≃1-eV XFEL bandwidth to be transmitted with minimal losses to alternative simultaneous experiments. Only ≲2% of the incident ≃100-W x-ray beam is absorbed in a 50- µm-thick ﬁrst diamond crystal reﬂector, ensuring that the monochromator crystal is highly stable. Other x-ray optics applications of diamond channel-cut crystals are anticipated. PACS numbers: 41.50.+h,41.60.Cr, 61.05.cp I. INTRODUCTION Hard x-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs) in the self- seeding mode [1, 2] generate fully coherent brilliant x-ray beams with a well-deﬁned and narrow spectrum, typi- cally with a bandwidth of ≃0.2 −1 eV [3–6] and a pulse duration of a few tens of femtoseconds. When operated in a high-repetition-rate (≃MHz) pulse sequence mode with properly tapered undulators, self-seeded XFELs may deliver x-rays with a pulse en- ergy of ≃10 mJ/pulse (≃7 × 1012 photons/pulse of ≃10-keV photons) and a time-averaged power of more than 100 W, corresponding to a time-averaged spectral ﬂux of ≃1017 photons/s in a bandwidth of ≲1 eV [7]. This ﬂux is about three orders of magnitude larger than the average spectral ﬂux currently possible with storage ring–based synchrotron radiation sources [see also [8, 9]]. An x-ray source with an increase of three orders of magnitude in the spectral ﬂux opens exciting new oppor- tunities for hard x-ray spectroscopic techniques, such as inelastic x-ray scattering [10], x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy [11] and nuclear resonant scattering [12] in particular. Such opportunities can be realized today, because high-repetition-rate hard x-ray XFELs are now a real- ity. The European XFEL in Hamburg (Germany) [13] is the ﬁrst operational high-repetition-rate XFEL facility. The LCLS-II-HE in Stanford (USA) [14] is coming soon. However, these new hard x-ray sources with high aver- age spectral brilliance present not only opportunities but also challenges. One challenge is how to monochromatize XFEL beams of very high average and peak power. ∗Electronic address: shvydko@anl.gov To address these challenges, we have designed, manu- factured and tested diamond channel-cut crystals for use as high-heat-load, beam-multiplexing, narrow-band (15- meV-bandwidth), mechanically-stable monochromators. A schematic of our channel-cut crystal design together with relevant x-ray beams is shown in Fig. 1(a). We choose a channel-cut monolithic monocrystalline design for two reasons. First, this design enables multiple suc- cessive Bragg reﬂections (two, four, etc.) by perfectly aligned, parallel, mechanically stable reﬂecting atomic planes in the reﬂecting crystal plates P1 and P2 of the monolithic system. Second, it ensures parallel propaga- tion of the incident and multiply reﬂected beams. The design includes a drumhead structure shown in Fig. 1(b) to permit one crystal face to be an ultrathin membrane, as discussed later. We choose diamond because diamond crystals have a unique combination of outstanding physical properties that are perfect for many x-ray optics applications for which traditional materials, such as silicon, fail to per- form [15]. Single crystals of silicon are attractive be- cause they have an almost perfect crystal lattice, are commercially available in large quantities and are com- monly used in x-ray crystal optics. However, many ap- plications, including those considered here, require better performance than silicon can deliver: speciﬁcally, better transparency to x-rays, resilience to radiation damage, mechanical stiﬀness, x-ray Bragg reﬂectivity and ther- mal conductivity. Diamond is a material of choice in such cases, as it is superior to silicon because of its un- rivaled radiation hardness, an order of magnitude higher transparency to x-rays, an order of magnitude higher stiﬀness [16, 17], orders of magnitude higher thermal conductivity [18, 19], small thermal expansion [20, 21] and almost 100% reﬂectivity in Bragg diﬀraction even in backscattering [22, 23]. This unique combination of out- standing properties makes diamond the most promising arXiv:2105.09301v1 [physics.ins-det] 16 May 2021

[PAGE 2] 2 (b) (a) P2 P1 P2 P1 FIG. 1: Schematic of monolithic channel-cut crystals with two reﬂecting crystal plates P1 and P2. Parallel lines in P1 and P2 indicate Bragg-reﬂecting atomic planes. (a) Standard two- plate channel-cut conﬁguration. (b) design discussed here, featuring a thin crystal membrane in a drumhead structure on plate P1. The membrane thickness is suﬃcient for high Bragg reﬂectivity in a narrow Bragg-reﬂection bandwidth and high transmissivity of the out-of-band x-rays. material for the transparent, resilient, high-resolution, wavefront-preserving x-ray optics components that are essential for many applications at third-generation light sources. These characteristics are especially important at next-generation high-brilliance, high-coherence light sources, such as diﬀraction-limited storage rings (DLSRs) and XFELs. The paper is organized as follows. Section II covers the function and optical design of the diamond channel- cut crystals. Details of fabrication are presented in Sec- tion III. Results of characterization of the crystals by x- ray rocking curve imaging are presented in Section IV A, and results of x-ray performance tests are given in Sec- tion IV B. Conclusions and outlook are discussed in Sec- tion V. II. FUNCTION AND OPTICAL DESIGN High-repetition-rate (HRR) hard x-ray self-seeded (HXRSS) XFELs will provide x-ray photon beams with an unprecedented spectral ﬂux density advantageous for many applications, in particular for high-resolution spec- troscopies, such as nuclear resonant scattering (NRS), inelastic x-ray scattering (IXS) and others. However, dealing with an x-ray beam of such high power is a chal- lenge. Diamond channel-cut crystals can help solve this problem. Our recipe for the solution has four ingredi- ents: a high-indexed Bragg reﬂection (for a narrow-band reﬂection), diamond crystal (for x-ray transparency and excellent thermomechanical properties), a drumhead de- sign (for small absorbed power and beam sharing) and a monolithic channel-cut design (for in-line geometry and stability). An important attribute of high-resolution spectro- scopies is the use of x-rays beams with milli-electron volt or even sub-milli-electron volt bandwidths. As a result, such techniques require x-ray sources with large spectral density, and ultra-high-resolution x-ray crystal monochromators with a bandpass of 1–0.1 meV along with submicroradian angular stability; see [24] for a re- view. Such optics usually cannot perform under high- heat-load conditions because of the resulting substantial angular instabilities. At storage ring synchrotron radia- tion facilities, additional primary or high-heat-load crys- tal monochromators are used [25]. This approach reduces the bandwidth of the undulator x-rays to about 1–2 eV and thus reduces substantially (by a factor of ≃100) the heat load on the ultra-high-resolution x-ray crystal monochromators. However, the standard high-heat-load monochroma- tors are not helpful to deal with x-ray beams generated by HRR-HXRSS XFELs, as these sources typically al- ready have a relatively narrow bandwidth of ≃1 eV. Rather, such beams require a high-resolution monochro- mator with a bandpass of ≃10 meV that is stable under high heat loads. This smaller bandpass would reduce the heat load on the ultra-high-resolution optic by a fac- tor of about 100. As an example, 10-keV x-rays can be monochromatized to ∆E ≃10 meV with a single Bragg reﬂection1. In this case, about 1% of the XFEL radi- ation power in the small bandwidth can be directed to the ultra-high-resolution monochromator and associated spectroscopic experiments. The remaining 99% of the in- cident ﬂux is transmitted, rather than being deposited in the crystal, thus avoiding crystal heating, the resulting angular instabilities and, therefore, angular instabilities in the reﬂected beam. If the monochromator is suitably designed, this remaining ﬂux can be directed to other experiments. Such multiplexing of the beam requires an x-ray- transparent Bragg-reﬂecting crystal. Such a crystal would allow most of the incident x-rays, with the excep- tion of the Bragg reﬂections in the narrow bandwidth, to pass through without absorption. Silicon cannot perform in this way because the 10 extinction lengths required for maximum Bragg reﬂectivity are comparable to the pho- toabsorption length in silicon. In contrast, for diamond crystals, 10 extinction lengths equal about 1/10th of the photoabsorption length. Exactly because in diamond the extinction length is much smaller than the absorption length, diamond crystals experience close to 100% Bragg reﬂectivity, even in backscattering, and simultaneously oﬀer high x-ray transparency [23]. Therefore, we chose to fabricate a diamond crystal membrane with a thickness of about 5 extinction lengths for high x-ray reﬂectivity and transparency. However, this dimension of 5 extinction lengths mea- sures only about 20 to 100 µm, depending on the cho- sen Bragg reﬂection. It is challenging to fabricate and 1 XFEL beams typically have a small angular divergence of ∆θ ≃ 2 µrad [26, 27]. Because of this property, monochromatiza- tion of x-rays to a ≃10 meV bandwidth can be achieved with a single high-indexed Bragg reﬂection, because the spec- tral broadening due to the angular divergence can be kept small (δE/E ≃∆θ/ tan θ ≲10−6), provided Bragg’s angle θ is large and tan θ ≫1. The use of high-indexed Bragg reﬂections with θ close to 90◦is therefore important.

[PAGE 3] 3 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 E −E0 / meV Reﬂectivity 17 meV 14.5 meV FIG. 2: Calculated x-ray photon energy dependencies for two successive 800 Bragg reﬂections from a diamond channel-cut crystal. The inset shows the optical setup. The central en- ergy, E0 = 14.4125 keV, corresponds to the nuclear resonance of 57Fe. Bragg’s angle is θ = 74.7207◦. The spectral depen- dences are calculated for two possible x-ray polarization states π and σ handle such ultrathin crystal components without intro- ducing crystal damage and strain. A solution is to use a drumhead crystal: a monolithic crystal structure com- prised of a thin membrane furnished with a surrounding solid collar, shown schematically in Fig. 1(b). This design ensures mechanically stable, strain-free mounting of the membrane while still allowing eﬃcient thermal transport [28]. Finally, to ensure a ﬁxed direction of the reﬂected x-rays independent of Bragg’s angle, we add one more equivalent Bragg reﬂection from another crystal plate in a non-dispersive setting, as shown in Fig. 1. To ensure me- chanical stability, both crystal plates are a part of a sin- gle, monolithic, channel-cut crystal structure. Channel- cut crystals have been popular in x-ray optics applica- tions since the 1960s [29–32]. Typically they are fabri- cated from silicon or germanium crystals. Manufacturing a channel-cut crystal from diamond is a challenge, but becomes possible using advanced modern techniques, as discussed in Section III. In the present discussion, we focus on a diamond mono- lithic channel-cut crystal for use with 14.4125 keV x-rays for 57Fe nuclear resonant experiments [12, 33, 34]. We also explored a similar design for use with 12.4 keV x- rays for 45Sc experiments [35]. The 733 Bragg reﬂection in diamond is the highest indexed reﬂection that is accessible with 14.4-keV x-rays; it has the largest Bragg’s angle (θ = 80.75226◦) and the smallest Bragg reﬂection bandwidth (13 meV). However, because of practical considerations related to channel-cut manufacturing (discussed in Section III), we opted for the reﬂection with the next highest index, the 800 Bragg 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 E −E0 / meV Reﬂectivity 30 meV 14.5 meV FIG. 3: Calculated x-ray photon energy dependencies for two successive 620 Bragg reﬂections from a diamond channel-cut crystal. The inset shows the optical setup. The central en- ergy, E0 = 12.4 keV, corresponds to the nuclear resonance in 45Sc. Bragg’s angle is 62.424◦. reﬂection, with a smaller Bragg’s angle of θ = 74.7207◦ and a larger bandwidth of 20 meV. Figure 2 shows predicted x-ray photon energy depen- dencies of the double 800 Bragg reﬂection proﬁles from a diamond channel-cut crystal, numerically calculated us- ing equations of dynamical theory of x-ray diﬀraction in crystals [24, 36]. The ﬁrst and second reﬂections are from 50-µm- and 500-µm-thick crystal plates, respec- tively. The energy bandwidth ∆E is 17 meV for the σ-polarization and 14.5 meV for the π-polarization com- ponents of the beam. An angular divergence of the inci- dent x-rays of 2.5 µrad is used in the calculations. The calculations show that only 2% of the incident x-ray beam is absorbed in the ﬁrst plate (the 50-µm-thick diamond drumhead crystal), thus making possible high stability of the monochromator crystal. Such a diamond monolithic channel-cut crystal can function as a two-bounce 800 Bragg reﬂection monochro- mator, deﬂecting 14.4 keV x-rays within a ≃15-meV bandwidth to 57Fe nuclear resonant scattering experi- ments, while the rest of the x-rays in the 1-eV XFEL bandwidth are transmitted through the thin drumhead crystal and could be transported to a simultaneous ex- periment 2. Similarly, 620 Bragg reﬂections are suitable for a di- amond channel-cut crystal narrow-band monochromator for 12.4 keV x-rays, corresponding to the nuclear reso- nance in 45Sc [35]; see Fig. 3. 2 To ensure further stability of such a multiplexed setup, it would be advantageous to choose the scattering plane for the diamond channel-cut crystal to be perpendicular to the scattering plane of the downstream ultra-high-resolution optic, as discussed in [7].

[PAGE 4] 4 0.5 5 4 0.05 2 2 [100] [001] a b FIG. 4: Schematic of the (800) diamond channel-cut crystal monochromator for 14.4-keV x-rays (black). The channel cut is machined from an as-grown cubo-octahedral diamond crys- tal stone (light blue). The graph shows top (a) and side (b) views with dimensions in millimeters. Propagation paths of x-ray beams with a 1-mm cross-section are shown in (a). III. MANUFACTURING Two conditions are key to successful realization of a properly functioning diamond channel-cut crystal x-ray monochromator: (1) the availability of ﬂawless, single- crystal diamond material in suﬃciently large workable sizes and (2) the ability to machine diamond without introducing crystal defects. The characteristic linear dimensions of presently avail- able high-quality synthetic diamond crystals are in the range of a few millimeters [see [15] for a recent review]. The crystals are relatively small but are suﬃcient for use with XFEL beams, which are typically less than 1 mm in cross-section. Figure 4 shows a schematic of the diamond channel-cut crystals produced in the present studies. The channel-cut crystals were cut from synthetically grown raw diamond stones of type IIa (with nitrogen content below 1 ppm). The diamond stones were grown using a temperature gradient method under high pressure and high temperature (HPHT) conditions. The stones used in these studies were grown and machined at the Technological Institute for Superhard and Novel Carbon Materials (TISNCM) in Troitsk, Russia [37, 38]. Raw HPHT-grown diamond stones typically have a cubo-octahedral form. It is well known that the top part of the (001) cubic growth sector (the area furthest from the 001 crystal seed) features the highest crystal quality with lowest defect density [39, 40]. Therefore, in these studies, the channel-cut crystals are extracted from the top part of the stone, as indicated in Fig. 4(b). With this cut, the crystal plate surfaces parallel to the atomic planes (hk0) and to the [001] direction take the largest (c) (d) (a) (b) P1 P2 P1 P2 FIG. 5: Photographs of the ﬁrst (800) channel-cut crystal taken after laser machining (a)-(b) and after annealing in air at 630◦C for 3 hours (c)-(d). volume of highest quality. For this reason, we chose to make a (800) monochromator for use with 14.4 keV x- rays, instead of the narrower band (733) design. Addi- tional reasons for the (800) choice are related to laser ma- chining, as discussed later. Similarly, we chose to make a (620) channel-cut monochromator for 12.4 keV x-rays in the 45Sc case. Production of the monochromator crystals begins with selection of high-quality, as-grown diamond crystal stones for machining by visual screening. To ensure the fewest defects, crystals with well-developed, defect-free cubic facets are selected, because, as noted previously, the (100) cubic growth sector contains the smallest amount of contamination and structural defects. The diamond stones are machined with the newest laser machining technologies. The monochromator atomic planes [(800) or (620)] of the selected diamond stones are oriented to an accuracy of better than 0.5◦, and the channel-cut crystals are cut to the designed shape using a pulsed Nd:YAG laser with the following parameters: 532 nm wavelength (second harmonic), 15 W average power, 10 kHz repetition rate, ≃1.5 mJ pulse energy, 40 ns pulse duration and 15 µm focused spot size (full width half maximum [FWHM]). The laser beam is positioned and steered on the work- piece with a two-coordinate optical mirror scanning sys- tem equipped with an F-Theta scanning lens. The laser beam is moved with a linear speed of 100 mm/s. The drumhead structure is formed by layer-by-layer ablation with picosecond pulses from a Nd:YAG laser op- erated in the third harmonic (355 nm wavelength) with the following parameters: 1 W average power, 10 ps pulse duration, 500 kHz repetition rate and 2 µJ pulse energy. The use of the third harmonic enables reduction of the focused beam spot size and most importantly reduction

[PAGE 5] 5 (a) P2 P1 (b) FIG. 6: Photographs of the (620) channel-cut crystal after annealing. of the diameter of a crater in diamond produced by a single laser pulse. The crater diameter is 8 µm, provided the beam is focused on the diamond surface. During ab- lation, the beam is steered over the workpiece at a speed of 150 mm/s with a similar two-coordinate scanning sys- tem with an F-Theta lens. The removal rate is about 0.3 µm per layer. The surface roughness of the drumhead surface after laser ablation of a 0.5-mm-thick crystal is ≲1 µm (rms). Similar laser parameters and procedures have been used previously to manufacture diamond x-ray lenses [41] and drumhead crystals [28]. Figure 5(a) shows photographs of the ﬁrst machined (800) channel-cut crystal. The crystals appear black after machining. Apparently, laser machining is accompanied by graphitization of the diamond surface. To erase the blackening, we anneal the crystals in air at a temperature of 630–650◦C for 3 hours, as in our previous and recent studies [28, 42]. After annealing, the blackening has van- ished, as seen on the photographs in Figs. 5(c)-(d). Most important, annealing erases any crystal strain induced in the process of laser cutting or ablation, which is critical for the proper functioning of the channel-cut crystal as a narrow-band x-ray monochromator. The annealing tem- perature is chosen such that all residuals of graphite and other carbon compounds are burned in air, while keep- ing diamond intact3. We will refer to this procedure as medium-temperature in-air annealing (MTA). The ﬁrst reﬂecting crystal plate of the channel-cut crystal (P1 in Fig. 5) features a 50-µm-thick drumhead, designed to achieve high reﬂectivity (≳90%) of x-rays in the Bragg-reﬂection band and 98% transmissivity of the out-of-band x-rays. X-rays in the 15-meV band reﬂected from both crystal plates (P1 and P2) of the channel- cut crystal (see Fig. 2) are directed to a high-spectral- resolution x-ray instrument. The major part, 98% of the incident x-rays in a 1-eV bandwidth [7, 9], is transmitted and can be used in simultaneous parallel experiments. The 2-mm-thick base allows the crystal to be mounted mechanically tight and strain-free and to be water-cooled eﬃciently, ensuring stable operation in high-power XFEL 3 Increasing annealing temperature or time may result in etching of the crystal surface. (a) P1 P2 P2 P1 (b) 4 mm 5 mm 50-µm drumhead FIG. 7: Photographs of the best-quality (800) channel-cut monochromator crystal (third iteration) after annealing. Note the optimized rectangular shape of the drumhead area. beams. Figure 6 shows an example of a (620) diamond channel- cut crystal designed and manufactured for 45Sc nuclear resonant experiments with 12.4 keV x-rays. The (620) channel-cut crystal also features a 50-µm drumhead on the ﬁrst plate P1. Making drumhead crystals in orienta- tions diﬀerent from (100) is a challenge [28]. Anisotropy of the physical properties of diamond crys- tals leads to diﬀerent results in laser ablation of sur- faces with diﬀerent crystal orientations. Surfaces with the (100) orientation do not present signiﬁcant problems for laser ablation. In contrast, surfaces with the (111) crystallographic orientation are most diﬃcult both for laser ablation and for polishing. Laser ablation of the (111) surface creates microcracks. The quality of the (620) surfaces after laser ablation is typically worse than that of the (100) surfaces. We found that increasing the crystal temperature improves the sur- face quality of the machined surfaces. During machining of the drumhead with the (620) surface orientation, the crystal is heated to 600◦C by a resistive heater installed in the crystal holder. Altogether, three (800) and two (620) channel-cut monochromator crystals were manufactured and charac- terized. In the following section, we present x-ray char- acterization results of the best (800) channel-cut crystal monochromator (third iteration), shown in Fig. 7 IV. CHARACTERIZATION OF CHANNEL-CUT CRYSTALS A. Crystal quality test: X-ray rocking-curve imaging The quality of the diamond channel-cut crystals was characterized using x-ray Bragg diﬀraction rocking curve imaging (RCI), also known as sequential topography [43]. In this technique, Bragg reﬂection images of a crystal under study are measured with a pixel x-ray detector, with images being taken sequentially at diﬀerent inci- dence angles to the reﬂecting atomic planes of the well- collimated x-rays; Bragg reﬂection maps are calculated

[PAGE 6] 6 C1 C2 pixel detector primary Si(111) monochromator Be E=9.8 keV E 1.5 eV θ z y x FIG. 8: The layout and optical components of the rocking curve imaging setup at APS bending magnet beamline 1BM, comprising a primary double-crystal Si(111) monochromator, beryllium (Be) window, Si conditioning crystal C1 in the asymmetric 531 reﬂection, diamond (800) channel-crystal un- der study C2 in the 400 Bragg reﬂection and pixel detector. X-rays with a 9.8-keV photon energy and a 1.5-eV bandwidth are used. for the reﬂection peak intensities, angular widths and angular positions. We used an RCI setup [42, 44] at x- ray optics testing beamline 1BM [45] at the Advanced Photon Source (APS), schematically shown in Fig. 8. The RCI setup employs a nearly non-dispersive double- crystal C1-C2 arrangement. The ﬁrst conditioning crys- tal C1 is an asymmetrically cut, high-quality silicon crys- tal in the 531 Bragg reﬂection; the second crystal C2 is the structure under study, the (800) diamond channel- cut crystal, in the 400 Bragg reﬂection. We used the 400 Bragg reﬂection rather than the 800 reﬂection to characterize the (800) channel-cut crystal for the follow- ing reason. We want both reﬂecting plates P1 and P2 of the channel-cut crystal to be illuminated and imaged simultaneously so that we can evaluate whether there is any angular misorientation of the plates due to crys- tal defects. To meet this requirement, the Bragg angle must be chosen close to 45◦, which in turn would re- quire high-energy (19.66-keV) x-ray photons if the 800 reﬂection were used. Such a choice would result in time- consuming measurements, as the photon ﬂux is relatively low at this high photon energy, and the angular reﬂec- tion width (∆θ800 = 1.2 µrad) is very narrow (compare to ∆θ800 = 4.7 µrad for 14.4-keV x-rays). Therefore, we chose instead the 400 Bragg reﬂection and 9.831-keV x- rays, for which Bragg’s angle θ400 = 45◦, with angular width ∆θ400 = 9.1 µrad if the crystal is 0.5 mm thick (reﬂecting plate P1), and ∆θ400 = 9.8 µrad if the crystal is 0.05 mm thick (drumhead area of reﬂecting plate P2). The upstream double-crystal Si(111) monochroma- tor is therefore tuned to select 9.831-keV x-rays. The monochromator bandwidth is ≃1.5 eV. For the condi- tioning crystal C1, Bragg’s angle is θ531 = 43.385◦. The asymmetry angle is chosen as η531 = 41.4◦, resulting in the asymmetry parameter b = −28.7. This choice en- sures ≃1 µrad angular collimation and a x-ray beam size greater than 20 mm illuminating the channel-cut crystal C2. Under these conditions, both plates of the channel-cut crystal are illuminated and can be imaged simultaneously in Bragg diﬀraction. The setup enables RCI mapping with submicroradian angular and 2.5-µm spatial resolution. P1 P2 (a) (b) (b′) (c) (c′) FIG. 9: The 400 Bragg reﬂection x-ray topography and the RCI maps of the diamond (800) channel-cut crystal measured after second MTA annealing. X-rays illuminate the front face of plate P1 and the rear face of plate P2 (drumhead), respec- tively, corresponding to Fig. 7(a). (a) X-ray topography taken at the peak of the crystal-integrated rocking curve. (b) and (c) Color maps of the Bragg reﬂection angular widths (FWHM) and mid-point of the Bragg reﬂection angular curves (rocking curves), respectively. White pixels indicate that the appropri- ate values of FWHM and mid-point are out of the color scale ranges. (b′) and (c′) Cross-section proﬁles of color maps (b) and (c), respectively, measured along the blue line indicated in (a). P2 P1 (a) (b) (b′) (c) (c′) FIG. 10: Similar to Fig. 9, but with the channel-cut crys- tal exposed to x-rays from the reverse side, corresponding to Fig. 7(b). X-ray images of the (800) channel-cut crystal taken at the maximum of the sample-integrated Bragg reﬂection curves are shown in Figs. 9(a) and 10(a). In Fig. 9, x- rays illuminate the front (working) face of plate P1 and the rear face of plate P2, respectively, as in Fig. 7(a). In Fig. 10, the sample is exposed to x-rays from the reverse side, as in Fig. 7(b). The angular dependencies of Bragg reﬂectivity (rock- ing curves) measured with each detector pixel are used to calculate Bragg reﬂection maps. Figures 9(b) and 10(b) show color maps of the angular widths (FWHM) of the rocking curves. The color maps of the rocking curves’ mid-points are shown in Figs. 9(b) and 10(b). The maps are calculated using a dedicated code [46]. Cross-sections through the FWHM and mid-point maps along the blue lines in Figs. 9(a) and 10(a) are presented in Figs. 9(c′) and 10(a), respectively.