[PAGE 1] All-diamond optical assemblies for a beam-multiplexing X-ray monochromator at the Linac Coherent Light Source ∗ S. Stoupin1, S.A. Terentyev2, V.D. Blank2, Yu.V. Shvyd’ko1, K.Goetze1, L. Assouﬁd1, S.N. Polyakov2,3, M.S. Kuznetsov2, N.V. Kornilov2, J. Katsoudas4, R. Alonso-Mori5, M. Chollet5, Y. Feng5, J.M. Glownia5, H. Lemke5, A. Robert5, S. Song5, M. Sikorski5, D. Zhu5 1Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, USA 2Technological Institute for Superhard and Novel Carbon Materials, Troitsk, Russia 3Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia 4Illinois Institude of Technology, Chicago, IL, USA 5Linac Coherent Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA A double-crystal diamond (111) monochromator recently implemented at the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) enables splitting of the primary X-ray beam into a pink (transmitted) and a monochromatic (reﬂected) branch. The ﬁrst monochromator crystal with a thickness of ≃100 µm provides suﬃcient X-ray transmittance to enable simultaneous operation of two beamlines. Here we report on the design, fabrication, and X-ray characterization of the ﬁrst and second (300-µm-thick) crystals utilized in the monochromator and the optical assemblies holding these crystals. Each crystal plate has a region of about 5 × 2 mm2 with low defect concentration, suﬃcient for use in X-ray optics at the LCLS. The optical assemblies holding the crystals were designed to provide mounting on a rigid substrate and to minimize mounting-induced crystal strain. The induced strain was evaluated using double-crystal X-ray topography and was found to be small over the 5 × 2 mm2 working regions of the crystals. Keywords: diamond crystal, beam multiplexing, double-crystal monochromator, X-ray optics, XFEL INTRODUCTION Top-quality type IIa diamond crystals suitable for advanced applications in X-ray crystal optics at syn- chrotrons and X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs) have recently become available due to reﬁnements in the high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT) crystal synthe- sis method [1–3]. Diamond crystal plates with (111) surface orientation are of primary importance for front- end diﬀracting X-ray optics due to a greater intrin- sic energy bandwidth of the 111 Bragg reﬂection and the resulting ﬂux of the reﬂected X-rays compared with those of higher-order reﬂections. However, production of the (111) crystal plates with large defect-free regions is a more challenging task compared with production of plates of other orientations close to the [001] direction. This is due to (i) the (001) diamond HPHT growth sector has the best crystal quality and the lowest impurity con- centration; and (ii) the {111} crystal faces are the most resistant to polishing since these planes have the highest atomic density. The primary application of diamond (111) crystal plates in X-ray optics are the high-heat-load double- crystal monochromators at synchrotron undulator beam- lines (e.g., [4–6]). A scheme of a double-crystal monochromator in Bragg reﬂection geometry is shown in Fig. 1. If the ﬁrst crystal is made suﬃciently thin, the ∗submitted for publication to Journal of Applied Crystallography http://journals.iucr.org/j/ FIG. 1: Scheme of a double-crystal beam-multiplexing monochromator in Bragg reﬂection geometry. The ﬁrst crys- tal is suﬃciently thin to avoid substantial losses in the trans- mitted branch due to photoabsorption. beam transmitted through it can be used in a parallel ex- periment downstream, i.e., beam multiplexing. Utiliza- tion of X-ray monochromators with low absorption crys- tals for beam multiplexing was pioneered at the TROIKA beamline at the ESRF (European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Grenoble, France) [4, 7, 8]. This beam multi- plexing approach gains even more importance for hard X- ray free-electron lasers, which recently redeﬁned the fron- tiers of X-ray sciences [9–11]. Using a single straight elec- tron trajectory of an XFEL, multi-user operations cannot be achieved as is commonly accomplished at storage-ring- based synchrotron sources. However, multiplexing can be performed by means of X-ray optics, which enables arXiv:1401.5879v1 [physics.optics] 23 Jan 2014

[PAGE 2] 2 simultaneous delivery of portions of the XFEL beam to several experiments. This yields an increase in the total number of performed experiments and thus reduces the high XFEL operating cost per experiment. Highly developed crystal fabrication and processing methods for silicon (Si) have led to a few attempts to use Si crystals for beam-multiplexing XFEL monochroma- tors. Greater X-ray absorption in Si requires utilization of ultra-thin crystals (thicknesses ≈5-10 µm) to achieve suﬃcient transmittance of the XFEL beam (30-80%) over a photon energy of 4-10 keV. High-quality ultra-thin Si crystals for XFEL beam-multiplexing monochromators can be manufactured using state-of-the-art processing methods [12, 13]; however, such ultra-thin crystals have been found unstable in the XFEL beam [12, 14]. Similar levels of transmittance can be achieved with crystal thicknesses of 50-100 µm in the case of diamond due to its lower X-ray absorption. The greater crystal thickness and Young’s modulus for diamond ensure a sub- stantially greater stiﬀness of the sample. Diamond crys- tals with such thicknesses are expected to be more stable in the XFEL beam if an appropriate crystal mounting scheme is provided. Because of the small divergence (≲1 µrad rms) of the XFEL beam its wavefront is particularly sensitive to im- perfections of X-ray optics. Disturbances of the wave- front introduced by the optics should be much less or at least comparable to the beam divergence, which is a chal- lenging requirement, especially for diamond crystal op- tics prone to crystal defects. Along with the presence of intrinsic defects, a mounting-induced crystal strain is an- other main factor that leads to deterioration of the crys- tal diﬀraction performance, which disturbs the radiation wavefront. The mounting solution previously developed by some of the co-authors for the diamond (001) self- seeding XFEL monochromator [15, 16] was found to show limitations in heat transfer between the crystal plate and the graphite holder where the plate was loosely mounted [17]. In this work we report on the production of 100-µm- thick and 300-µm-thick type IIa HPHT diamond crystal plates with (111) orientation. Each crystal plate has a region with low concentration of defects (working region) of about 5 × 2 mm2 suﬃcient for use in XFEL optics. More importantly, we present a solution for strain mini- mization as a special mounting of such crystals on a rigid substrate. All parts of the optical assembly were fabri- cated out of diamond, which improved heat transfer and radiation hardness of the device. The mounting-induced strain was evaluated using double-crystal X-ray topog- raphy in rocking curve diﬀraction imaging mode. The mounting induced crystal distortion (1.5 µrad rms varia- tion in the rocking curve peak position across the working region) was substantially smaller than the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the rocking curve width (25- 30 µrad) and still comparable to the divergence of the 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 x [mm] y [mm] 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 x [mm] y [mm] (a) (b) FIG. 2: White-beam X-ray topographs of the selected dia- mond (111) crystal plates: (a) 300-µm-thick plate (second monochromator crystal) and (b) 100-µm-thick plate (ﬁrst monochromator crystal). The images are obtained from 3¯1¯1 diamond reﬂection in Laue geometry. The dotted box illus- trates the 5 × 2 mm2 working regions containing only a few defects. XFEL beam. Two such assemblies were installed into the vacuum tank of the beam-multiplexing monochroma- tor at the XPP instrument of the Linac Coherent Light Source and successfully tested [18]. The monochromator was operated in Bragg reﬂection geometry, as shown in Fig. 1. The capability of splitting the XFEL beam into a pink (transmitted) and a monochromatic (reﬂected) branch was demonstrated, which enables the use of the XFEL beam in two experiments simultaneously. DIAMOND (111) CRYSTAL PLATES Type IIa diamond single crystals were grown at the Technological Institute for Superhard and Novel Carbon

[PAGE 3] 3 Materials (TISNCM) using the temperature-gradient method at high static pressure and high temperature (e.g., [2, 19]). The temperature of crystallization was 1460 ◦C at a pressure of 5.5 GPa. After the crystalliza- tion process, diamond crystals were cut by a laser along the {111} crystal plane with a ≃2◦angular oﬀset from the plane. The angular oﬀset was introduced to facilitate mechanical polishing of the crystal plates. The plates were polished to a micro-roughness of ≈10 nm (rms). Preliminary selection of crystal plates with low density of crystal defects was made using Lang X-ray topography. For the ﬁnal selection of diamond crystal plates, white- beam X-ray topography was performed at the MRCAT 10BM (bending magnet) beamline [20] of the Advanced Photon Source. White-beam X-ray topographs were ob- tained in Laue (transmission) geometry on the diamond plates enclosed in Kapton ﬁlm holders. The source-to- sample distance was L ≃27 m, the eﬀective source size at the beamline was s ≈300 µm, and the distance from the sample to the observation plane was d ≃0.1 m. Thus, the expected spatial resolution in the observation plane was δ = sd/L ≃1 µm, which was comparable with the photographic resolution of the utilized X-ray ﬁlm (AGFA STRUCTURIX D3-SC). We note that the image resolution was somewhat re- duced due to crystal instability caused by heat load of the X-rays during the shortest available exposure time (≈2 s). Multiple images were taken to mitigate this problem. High-quality topographs were obtained from the 3¯1¯1 reﬂections. They are shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b) for the selected 300-µm-thick and 100-µm-thick crystal plates, respectively. The dotted box in Fig. 2(a) and (b) shows the 5 × 2 mm2 working regions originated for the most part from the (001) growth sector with a low concentration of defects. A few defects of about 10 µm in size are notice- able in the working regions of the crystals. These can be attributed to minor dislocations and micro-inclusions. The diagonal lines represent stacking faults that likely originate at the growth sector boundaries. Nevertheless, the crystals are of remarkable quality in the 5 × 2 mm2 region, especially if compared to commercially available type IIa diamond (111) crystals (e.g., the crystal studied earlier by some of the authors [21]). CRYSTAL MOUNTING METHOD The relative intrinsic energy bandwidth of X-ray Bragg reﬂection is a very small quantity (∆E/E ≈10−5−10−7), which is related to the small intrinsic angular width ∆θ ≈1 −100 µrad (except Bragg-backscattering cases θ ≃90◦): ∆E E = ∆θ tan θ. (1) 2 1 3 4 (a) (b) FIG. 3: Scheme of the all-diamond optical assembly. (a) Per- spective view showing the components of the assembly: type IIa HPHT diamond (111) crystal plate 1, a CVD diamond substrate 2, diamond restrainers 3, and perforated CVD di- amond springs 4. (b) Side view shows the orientation of the grooves in the restrainers for insertion of the CVD diamond spring. The groove is at an angle α relative to the surface of the optical element. FIG. 4: Scheme of the CVD spring. The inset is an en- larged view showing perforation dimensions. All dimensions are given in mm. Since the relative energy bandwidth is small, a simi- larly small relative crystal strain δa/a ∼∆E/E (a is the crystal lattice parameter) can distort the shape of the intrinsic curves and reduce performance of the crystal as a monochromator. Thin Bragg crystals are partic- ularly aﬀected since relative deformations of the crystal are larger for a given applied stress (force). A simple fact that a thin crystal has a ﬁxed contact point with a holder (achieved via bonding using glue, tape, or even grease) can be distinguished in Bragg diﬀraction from a situation where the crystal has a nearly free boundary (i.e., mo-

[PAGE 4] 4 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) FIG. 5: All-diamond assemblies (top view) with high-quality diamond crystal plates (type IIa, HPHT, (111) surface orientation) mounted on a CVD diamond substrate: (a) assembly with a 300-µm-thick diamond crystal plate using non-perforated CVD diamond springs; (b) assembly with a 100-µm-thick diamond crystal plate using perforated CVD diamond springs; (c) assembly with the same 100-µm-thick diamond crystal plate using non-perforated CVD diamond springs. The bright rectangles in (a-c) are the 5 × 2 mm2 windows in the CVD substrates for passage of X-rays transmitted through the diamond plates. Selected microscope images: (d) an enlarged view of the perforated CVD diamond spring, and (e) a side perspective view of a diamond restrainer. A CVD spring that acts on the HPHT crystal is inserted into a groove in the restrainer. tion of the crystal is constrained only by friction against a crystal holder). Such a nearly free boundary condition is appropriate for certain applications; however, in this case the crystal is very susceptible to vibrations. Also, thermal transfer between the crystal and the holder could be limited due to reduced surface contact. These factors may severely deteriorate diﬀraction performance of the crystal under an intense incident X-ray beam. In this work, an alternative approach to mounting a diﬀracting crystal is explored, which includes a gentle pressure (a spring force) applied to the crystal placed on a rigid substrate. This force is applied in a controlled manner, such that the resulting strain is evaluated and limited to desired speciﬁcations. The optical assembly is schematically shown in Fig. 3. In order to minimize issues related to diﬀerential thermal expansion, and to improve radiation hardness and thermal transfer all parts of the assembly were manufactured out of diamond materials. To improve thermal transfer between the substrate and the crystal their surfaces in contact were polished. A high-quality type IIa HPHT diamond (111) crystal plate is mounted on a substrate fabricated out of poly- crystalline chemical vapor deposited (CVD) diamond. The substrate is suﬃciently thick (500 µm) to provide rigid support for the diamond plate. The surface of the substrate in contact with the diamond plate was polished to ≈10 nm (rms) micro-roughness. The substrate has two small rectangular openings for insertion of restrain- ers made of low-quality type IIa HPHT diamond and one large rectangular window (5 ×2 mm2) for passage of X-rays transmitted through the diamond plate. The di- amond plate has two small rectangular cuts on the sides such that the restrainers prevent lateral displacement of the plate on the substrate. The restrainers have grooves for insertion of 15-µm-thick CVD diamond stripes (CVD springs) that provide gentle force on the diamond plate, thus preventing its vertical displacement. The force act- ing on the diamond is F ∝α L2 k, (2) where α is the bending angle of the CVD spring as shown in Fig. 3(b), L is the length of the spring, and k is the ﬂexural stiﬀness of the spring. The spring can be ap- proximated by a cantilever beam with an area moment of inertia I, such that k = EI, where E is the Young’s mod- ulus. Thus, for a ﬁxed angle α (in our design α ≃15◦) the force can be controlled by either variation of the length of the spring or variation of the spring stiﬀness. Increasing the length of the spring was found to be in- suﬃcient in our experiments to reach very small forces to minimize mounting strain in diamond crystal plates with ≈100-µm thickness. An additional spring force reduc- tion was achieved by changing the stiﬀness of the CVD springs. The best solution to substantially reduce the stiﬀness of the springs was to introduce periodic strain- relief cuts (perforation) in the spring as shown in Fig. 4. All diamond components were manufactured at TIS- NCM using HPHT and CVD diamond synthesis meth- ods and a controlled precision laser cutting of diamond materials. Polycrystalline CVD diamond ﬁlms were de- posited onto 640-µm-thick Si single-crystal substrates. Prior to deposition the Si substrates were ultrasonically treated in diamond powder suspension in ethanol. Dia- mond deposition process was carried out in a bell jar-type

[PAGE 5] 5 Microwave Plasma-Assisted Chemical Vapor Deposition (MWPA CVD) reactor. The substrate temperature was maintained at 860-870 C◦. The methane concentration was 6% in a total ﬂow of 500 sccm. The microwave power was in the range 3 - 3.2 kW at a total pressure of about 200 mbar during deposition of thick ﬁlms for production of the 500-µm-thick CVD diamond substrates, and 130 mbar during deposition of thin ﬂexible ﬁlms for produc- tion of the 15-µm-thick CVD springs. After the deposi- tion the diamond ﬁlms were separated from the silicon substrates by dissolution of the substrates in 44 wt.% solution of KOH in water at 50◦. The devices were assembled and cleaned at the Ad- vanced Photon Source. Microscope images of the all- diamond assemblies are shown in Fig. 5. Figure 5(a) shows an assembly with a 300-µm-thick diamond crys- tal plate mounted using non-perforated CVD diamond springs. Figure 5(b) shows an assembly with a 100-µm- thick diamond crystal plate mounted using perforated CVD diamond springs. Figure 5(c) shows an assem- bly with the same 100-µm-thick diamond crystal plate mounted using non-perforated CVD diamond springs. Figure 5(d) shows an enlarged view of the perforated spring acting on the 100-µm-thick diamond crystal plate, and Fig. 5(e) shows an enlarged side perspective view of a restrainer with an inserted CVD spring. CHARACTERIZATION OF MOUNTING-INDUCED STRAIN Experimental Rocking curve measurements and rocking curve imag- ing [22] were the main diagnostic methods for evaluating the mounting-induced crystal strain in the all-diamond assemblies. Double-crystal topography using a Cu Kα rotating anode X-ray source was performed to map the rocking curve of diamond crystal plates mounted in the holder assemblies. A Si (220) ﬁrst crystal with an asym- metry angle ηSi ≃22.2◦was used to collimate an X-ray beam incident on the diamond crystal plate (C) mounted in the all-diamond assembly (Fig. 6). The diamond crys- tal was set for the 111 reﬂection. The Bragg angle of the diamond crystal was θC ≃22.0◦, which was close to the Bragg angle of the collimator crystal θSi ≃23.7◦. In order to align the diamond crystal for the 111 reﬂec- tion and to obtain the rocking curve of the entire crystal (total rocking curve), the intensity reﬂected from a uni- formly illuminated diamond crystal was measured using a scintillation detector (SD). A CCD camera (with a res- olution 60 × 60 µm2) replacing SD was used to obtain a series of X-ray diﬀraction images at diﬀerent angular po- sitions of the diamond crystal through the rocking curve of the 111 reﬂection. The image data were sorted such that a local rocking curve was obtained for every pixel, Cu K x-ray source SD/CCD Si Si HSi 220 C HC 111 Si C FIG. 6: Double-crystal topography setup for mapping the rocking curve of the 111 diamond reﬂection (see text for de- tails). thus making it possible to map the rocking curve param- eters over the entire crystal (i.e., rocking curve imaging). The angular resolution in the rocking curve scan was ≈4 µrad, which is small compared with the FWHM of the ideal rocking curve in the double-crystal geometry (25 µrad). The latter was evaluated using the dynamical theory of X-ray diﬀraction assuming a uniform angular distribution of the radiation incident on the ﬁrst crystal (over an angular range exceeding the angular acceptance region of the crystal) and a photon energy distribution of the Cu Kα characteristic lines [23]. Analysis of total and local rocking curves Figure 7 shows measured total rocking curves (blue circles and lines), the theoretical rocking curve (solid black line), and local rocking curves (green circles and lines) from a selected pixel at the center of the work- ing region on the diamond (111) crystal plate. Fig- ure 7(a) shows rocking curves for the 300-µm-thick crys- tal mounted using non-perforated CVD diamond springs (as shown in Fig. 5(a)). The FWHM of the local rock- ing curve matches that of the theoretical curve (25 µrad) while the total curve exhibits an additional broadening. This observation suggests that the broadening of the to- tal rocking curve is due to the presence of defects in the crystal (i.e., intrinsic strain). The defects are located out- side the working region of the crystal as will be shown further. Figure 7(b) similarly shows rocking curves for the 100- µm-thick crystal mounted using perforated CVD dia- mond springs (as shown in Fig. 5(b)). In this case, both the total rocking curve and the local rocking curve exhibit an additional broadening compared to the FWHM of the theoretical rocking curve for the 100-µm-thick crystal (26 µrad). Figure 7(c) shows rocking curves for the 100-µm- thick crystal mounted using non-perforated CVD dia- mond springs. The broadening of the local rocking curve becomes somewhat larger, which suggests that the use

[PAGE 6] 6 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Normalized reﬂectivity -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 - C [ rad] 25 rad 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Normalized reﬂectivity -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 - C [ rad] 26 rad 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Normalized reﬂectivity -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 - C [ rad] 26 rad (a) (b) (c) FIG. 7: Rocking curves of diamond crystal plates in the all-diamond assemblies: total (ﬁlled blue circles, dashed blue line), local (open green circles, dotted green line), and theoretical (solid black line) for (a) a 300-µm-thick plate mounted using non-perforated CVD diamond springs; (b) a 100-µm-thick plate mounted using perforated CVD diamond springs; and (c) a 100-µm-thick plate mounted using non-perforated CVD diamond springs. of perforated springs is preferable for minimization of strain. However, this observation needs an additional veriﬁcation, since there could be a variation in the local rocking curve from one pixel to another. The values of FWHM of the measured total and lo- cal rocking curves and those of the theoretical rocking curves are given in Table I for each case. The FWHM of the total rocking curve (36 µrad) is about the same for (b) and (c), which indicates that the broadening is dominated by crystal defects and that this parameter is not very sensitive to mounting strain. The broadening is smaller than the intrinsic angular width (Darwin width) of the reﬂection (≃23.1 µrad). For certain applications of diamond in X-ray optics this validates the quality of the entire crystal and the mounting method using either springs. However, in our case the desired level of broad- ening should be less than or comparable with the angular divergence of the XFEL beam (1-2 µrad rms) to mini- mize disturbance of the radiation wavefront. Therefore, a more detailed characterization of the working crystal region is required. TABLE I: Total (∆θtot), local (∆θ), and theoretical (∆θ0) rocking curve FWHM for assemblies (a), (b), and (c) (Fig. 5) with diﬀerent diamond (111) crystal plate thicknesses (t) and CVD springs. assembly t CVD springs ∆θtot ∆θ ∆θ0 (µm) (µrad) (µrad) (µrad) (a) 300 non-perforated 30 25 25 (b) 100 perforated 36 28 26 (c) 100 non-perforated 36 32 26 Analysis of the rocking curve topographs The comparative analysis of the widths of the total and local rocking curves does not show a complete picture since it does not take into account a distribution of the rocking curve parameters over the crystal plate. A more sensitive indicator of the crystal strain is a local change in the lattice parameter or a tilt of the Bragg plane, which lead to a shift in the peak position of the local rocking curve. In our diﬀraction imaging analysis this shift is represented by the center of mass of the local rocking curve (COM). Figure 8 shows maps (topographs) of the rocking curve COM and FWHM for the 300-µm-thick plate mounted using the non-perforated springs (a), the 100-µm-thick plate mounted using the perforated springs (b), and the 100-µm-thick plate mounted using the non-perforated springs (c). These maps resemble the white-beam to- pographs given above. In particular, higher crystal qual- ity in the working region and the diagonal lines (note higher contrast in FWHM) representing growth sector boundaries are clearly observed. The COM topographs indicate that a substantial strain is present in the up- per part of the crystals. In the COM topographs for (a) and (b) the contrast is predominantly due to the in- trinsic strain (presence of defects). In the case (c) the COM gradient is stronger, which indicates the presence of mounting-induced strain. The topographs of the working region are shown sepa- rately in Fig. 9. The distribution of the FWHM is fairly uniform across the working region in each case. The COM topographs for (a) and (b) are again quite uniform, while in the case (c) a distinct gradient is observed. The topographs of the working region illustrate that for the