[PAGE 1] arXiv:1207.1981v1 [physics.acc-ph] 9 Jul 2012 DEUTSCHES ELEKTRONEN-SYNCHROTRON Ein Forschungszentrum der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft DESY 12-121 July 2012 Extension of self-seeding scheme with single crystal monochromator to lower energy < 5 keV as a way to generate multi-TW scale pulses at the European XFEL Gianluca Geloni, European XFEL GmbH, Hamburg Vitali Kocharyan and Evgeni Saldin Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Hamburg ISSN 0418-9833 NOTKESTRASSE 85 - 22607 HAMBURG

[PAGE 2] Extension of self-seeding scheme with single crystal monochromator to lower energy < 5 keV as a way to generate multi-TW scale pulses at the European XFEL Gianluca Geloni, a,1 Vitali Kocharyan b and Evgeni Saldin b aEuropean XFEL GmbH, Hamburg, Germany bDeutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Hamburg, Germany Abstract We propose a use of the self-seeding scheme with single crystal monochroma- tor to produce high power, fully-coherent pulses for applications at a dedicated bio-imaging beamline at the European X-ray FEL in the photon energy range be- tween 3.5 keV and 5 keV. We exploit the C(111) Bragg reﬂection (π-polarization) in diamond crystals with a thickness of 0.1 mm, and we show that, by tapering the 40 cells of the SASE3 type undulator the FEL power can reach up to 2 TW in the entire photon energy range. The present design assumes the use of a nominal electron bunch with charge 0.1 nC at nominal electron beam energy 17.5 GeV. The main application of the scheme proposed in this work is for single shot imaging of individual protein molecules. 1 Introduction Despite the unprecedented increase in peak power of X-ray pulses from SASE X-rayFELs, some applicationsincludingimagingofcomplexmolecules like proteins and other biologically interesting structures may still require higher photon ﬂux (see, among others, [1]-[3]). The most promising way to extract more FEL power than that at saturation is by tapering the magnetic ﬁeld of the undulator [4]-[7]. Also, a signiﬁcant increase in power is achiev- able by starting the FEL process from monochromatic seed rather than from noise [8]-[10]. Self-seeding is a promising approach to signiﬁcantly narrow 1 Corresponding Author. E-mail address: gianluca.geloni@xfel.eu Preprint submitted to 9 November 2018

[PAGE 3] the SASE bandwidth and to produce nearly transform-limited pulses [11]- [17]. The combination of self-seeding and tapering techniques would allow to meet the desired TW-scale output power for bio-imaging applications [18]-[22]. We recently proposed a study for a possible dedicated bio-imaging beamline at the European XFEL [23]. In that concept we suggested that the use of a single crystal self-seeding scheme would allow to deliver nearly transform- limited TW-scale X-ray pulses in the photon energy range between 8 keV and 13 keV. However, potential users of such a bio-imaging beamline mainly wish to investigate their samples in the energy range between 3 keV and 5 keV, where the diﬀraction signal is stronger. Finding a solution suitable for this spectral range is major challenge for self-seeding designers. In fact, due to high absorption, both single crystal monochromators and grating monochromators have a low throughput in the energy range between 3 keV and 5 keV. In [23] we proposed a method to get around this obstacle, which is based in essence on a fresh bunch technique [24] and exploits a conservative design of a self-seeding setup based on grating monochromator [25, 26] in the photon energy range between 0.3 keV and 1.7 keV. In this work we propose an alternative possibility to provide bio-imaging capabilities in the photon energy range between 3 keV and 5 keV, based on an extension ofthe original design ofthe self-seedingscheme with single crystal monochromator down to 3 keV. We still suggest to use a diamond crystal with thickness 0.1 mm. However, we consider a symmetric C(111) Bragg reﬂection (π-polarization). This reﬂection will allow to cover the photon energy range from 3.5 keV to 5 keV. We demonstrate that the previously mentioned drawback of a low throughput can be overcome by enabling a cascade self-seeding scheme [27]. In its simplest conﬁguration, a self-seeded XFEL consists of an input un- dulator and an output undulator separated by a single crystal monochro- mator. At photon energies below 5 keV absorption in crystals is very high and the simplest conﬁguration, based on two undulators, is not optimal. A possible extension is to use a setup with three or more undulators sep- arated by monochromators. Each cascade consists of an undulator acting as an ampliﬁer, and of a single crystal monochromator. The ampliﬁcation- monochromatization cascade scheme is distinguished, in performance, by a high signal-to-noise ratio and by small electron beam perturbations at the entrance of the output undulator. In this paper we study such scheme, which consists of two parts: ﬁrst, a a succession of two ampliﬁcation- monochromatization cascades and, second, an output undulator in which the monochromatic seed is ampliﬁed up to 2 TW power. 3

[PAGE 4] Fig. 1. Schematic of a two-cascade self-seeding scheme with single crystal monochromators. This scheme holds a great promise as a source of X-ray radi- ation in the 3.5 keV - 5 keV photon energy range for applications such as single biomolecule imaging. 0,3542 0,3543 0,3543 0,3544 0,3544 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,3 |T| [nm] 0,3542 0,3543 0,3543 0,3544 0,3544 -20 -10 0 10 Arg[T] [rad] [nm] Fig. 2. Absolute value and phase of the transmission function pertaining the C(111) forward diﬀraction of a 100 µm-thick diamond crystal (π-polarization). 2 Principle of cascade self-seeding technique based on the use of single crystal monochromators The self-seeding technique considered in this work is based on the substitu- tion of a single undulator module with a weak chicane and a single crystal. Two cascades can be arranged sequentially as shown in Fig. 1. The ﬁrst undulator in Fig. 1 operates in the linear high-gain regime start- ing from the shot-noise in the electron beam. After the ﬁrst undulator, the output SASE radiation passes through the monochromator, which reduces the bandwidth to the desired value. According to the wake monochromator principle, the SASE pulse coming from the ﬁrst undulator impinges on a crystal set for Bragg diﬀraction. 4

[PAGE 5] First cascade crystal monochromator Input spectrum Output spectrum Fig. 3. Eﬀect of the ﬁltering process provided by the ﬁrst diamond crystal on the incident spectrum of the radiation. -30 -20 -10 0 0,0 5,0x10 5 1,0x10 6 1,5x10 6 2,0x10 6 P[W] s m] Fig. 4. Temporal shape of the seed signal from the ﬁrst self-seeding setup. The black arrow indicates the seeding region used in this article. The single crystal in Bragggeometryactually operates asa bandstop ﬁlter for the transmitted X-ray SASE radiation pulse. The ﬁlter transmission function in modulus and phase is shown in Fig. 2, where the central bandwidth can be tuned by properly tilting the crystal. In Fig. 3 we show the eﬀect of the ﬁltering through the crystal on the incident spectrum of the radiation. When 5

[PAGE 6] -4 -2 0 2 4 0 1x10 9 2x10 9 3x10 9 4x10 9 5x10 9 P[W] s m] -4 -2 0 2 4 0 1x10 9 2x10 9 3x10 9 P[W] s m] Fig. 5. Power before the ﬁrst (left) and the second (right) monochromator. Second cascade crystal monochromator Input spectrum Output spectrum Fig. 6. Eﬀect of the ﬁltering process provided by the second diamond crystal on the incident spectrum of the radiation. the incident angle and the spectral contents of the incoming beam satisfy the Bragg diﬀraction condition, the temporal waveform of the transmitted radiation pulse shows a long monochromatic wake, whose particular shape is linked to the shape of the ﬁlter in the frequency domain. The overall duration of this wake is inversely proportional to the bandwidth of the absorption line in the transmittance spectrum, while the particular shape of the wake, which in our case exhibits several oscillations on a shorter temporal scale, is due to the particular characteristics of the ﬁlter in the frequency domain. These characteristics are calculated in the frequency domain with the help of the dynamical theory of X-ray diﬀraction. In other words, all the physics involved can be limited to the frequency domain. After this task is accomplished, the particular shape of the wake can be simply interpreted as a consequence of a Fourier transform. It should be noted that, for the energy range under examination, between 3 keV and 5 keV, it is useful to consider the π-polarization of the C(111) reﬂection from a 0.1 mm-thick diamond crystal. The advantage of using the π-polarization is 6