[PAGE 1] Surface & Coatings Technology 470 (2023) 129826 Available online 22 July 2023 0257-8972/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Thermo-mechanical analysis of TBC-film cooling system under high blowing ratio considering the effects of curvature Linchuan Liu a, Shunguo Fu b, Zhongwei Hu c, Jian Wu c, Jian Chen a, Xiaochao Jin a,*, Xueling Fan a a Xi'an Key Laboratory of Extreme Environmental Serviceability and Protection Technologies, School of Aerospace Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China b AEEC Sichuan Gas Turbine Establishment, Mianyang 510700, China c AEEC Sichuan Gas Turbine Establishment, Chengdu, 610500, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Thermal barrier coating Film cooling Thermo-mechanical analysis Substrate curvature High blowing ratio A B S T R A C T Understanding the thermo-mechanical behavior of thermal barrier coating (TBC)-film cooling system under different curvatures is crucial for predicting the failure of turbine blade and improving its reliability. In this work, a thermal-fluid-structure coupling method was implemented to systematically explore the cooling efficiency and interface stress of the TBC-film cooling system with different curvatures under steady-state and transient con­ ditions, predict the location and potential causes of coating failure, and provide guidance and suggestions for the structural design of blades. The results showed that the cooling efficiency and interface stress of the system were closely related to curvature. Model I and Model II cracks may be induced by normal and shear stresses generated at the edge of the cooling hole and interface. The growth of thermally grown oxide and the yield behavior of bond-coat have a significant impact on the stress level of coating system. The most dangerous area was located downstream of cooling hole at the thermally grown oxide and bond-coat layer interface. Additionally, due to mainstream ingestion, the concave model was more susceptible to high transient stresses during the heating stage, while the convex model was more likely to induce higher thermal mismatch and residual stresses during the stabilization and cooling stages, leading to coating failure. 1. Introduction The gas temperature upstream of the turbine serves as a pivotal in­ dicator of aero-engine advancements. Currently, the turbine inlet tem­ perature of sophisticated fighter jet engines surpasses 2000 K, far exceeding the maximum temperature tolerance of the substrate. By augmenting surface thermal resistance, film cooling and thermal barrier coating (TBC) elevate the service temperature of turbine blades, affording optimal protection against high temperature and oxidation for the blades [1–4]. Typically, the TBC is comprised of a load-bearing substrate (Sub), a ceramic top-coat (TC), a metallic bond-coat (BC), and a thermally grown oxide (TGO) that develops at the interface of TC and BC. The TBC-film cooling system is subjected to complex load conditions, comprising thermal mismatch stress arising from material physical properties, thermal stress arising from steep temperature gra­ dients, and high local stress concentration caused by the free-edge effect [5,6]. As a result, the TBC-film cooling system has consistently been recognized as a precarious region where coating failure would occur. Over the past few decades, the temperature distribution features of discrete holes have been extensively investigated, and variables such as blowing ratio, pitch diameter ratio, hole diameter, and hole inclination have been qualitatively analyzed [7–9]. However, most experiments and computations have yet to explore the mechanical response of the system, which cannot reveal the root cause of coating failure. During thermal cycling, failure of TBCs is typically manifested as localized detachment and spalling [10,11]. The interface stresses are widely recognized as an inherent contributor to potential failure [12,13]. Hsueh et al. [14] found that interfacial peeling stress (perpendicular to the interface) and shear stress were generated in the regions adjacent to free edges of TBCs, which could act as the driving forces for model I and model II edge cracks. Jiang et al. [5] examined the thermo-mechanical performance of the TBC-film cooling system on a flat substrate under high temperature and 500-h creep, building on Hsueh's conclusions. The studies proved that film cooling resulted in a steep thermal gradient, giving rise to * Corresponding author. E-mail address: jinxiaochao@xjtu.edu.cn (X. Jin). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Surface & Coatings Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/surfcoat https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2023.129826 Received 4 May 2023; Received in revised form 19 July 2023; Accepted 20 July 2023

[PAGE 2] Surface & Coatings Technology 470 (2023) 129826 2 interfacial peeling stress and shear stress at the edge of the hole. These stresses may initiate model I and model II edge cracks in TBCs during heating or cooling, respectively. However, the blade has a complex curved structure and the inclusion of a curved surface will result in additional flow effects and interfacial stresses [15,16]. Pu et al. [16] pointed out that the blowing ratio of the engine ranged from 0.5 to 2.0, and found that the convex structure exhibited excellent cooling efficiency at lower blowing ratios, while this phenomenon reversed at blowing ratios greater than 1.5. Schwarz et al. [17] conducted an experimental study to examine the cooling efficacy of a curved structure subjected to a blowing ratio between 0.3 and 2.7. They discovered that the concave surface evinced exceptional cooling efficiency at high blowing ratios, attributing it to the comparison of cross-stream pressure gradient and centrifugal force. Currently, most studies focus on the heat transfer characteristics of blades under blowing ratios of 0.5–2.0 [18–20], with limited reports on the thermo- mechanical behavior of curved structures. This study aims to fill this gap by using a blowing ratio of 2 as a condition for high blowing ratio. In addition, extant researches have evinced that the curvature of the substrate has a significant impact on the allocation of interfacial stresses [15–17,21–28]. Liu et al. [12,29–31] utilized Raman spectroscopy and photo-stimulated piezo-luminescence spectroscopy to measure the re­ sidual stress in the TC and TGO during thermal exposure on the cross- sections. Their findings indicated that residual stress in the TGO was dependent on the substrate curvature, with higher residual stresses observed in cases of greater substrate curvature. Additionally, cracks were observed to preferentially occur at sites with high substrate convex curvature. Mao et al. [21] calculated the residual radial stress and hoop stress by extending Lame equations and found that the maximum tensile radial stress would increase by about 65 % when substrate curvature increases by 4 times. Hoop stress gradually increased as substrate cur­ vature radius increases. However, most of the current studies solely take into account a single variable, and few combine film cooling with sub­ strate curvature to reveal the failure mechanism of the coating. Thus, it is necessary to understand the heat transfer and mechanical behavior of TBC-film cooling system under different curvature conditions to improve the reliability of blades. In this work, the thermo-mechanical behaviors of the TBC-film cooling system with different curvatures were numerically studied using thermal-fluid-solid coupling method. The influence of substrate curvature on the cooling efficiency of TBC-film cooling system was analyzed based on fluid dynamics, with a blowing ratio of 2. In addition, by performing steady-state and transient analysis of interface tempera­ ture and stress, the location and potential causes of coating failure were predicted, providing guidance and suggestions for the structural design of blades. 2. The finite element model and method 2.1. Geometric and mesh models To simulate the loading conditions of the TBC-film cooling system during actual operation, the geometrical models are designed as arc- shaped multilayer structures [21,32]. The curvature of substrate can be expressed by a dimensionless curvature parameter 2r/d, where r and d are the curvature radius of substrate and the cooling hole diameter, respectively [33–35]. Nine models with different curvature are shown in Fig. 1, including one flat model, four concave models and four convex models. To ensure that the contact area between the mainstream and the substrate remains the same across all cases, the models are designed with equal arc length. Fig. 2 illustrates the three-dimensional models of the curved substrate with curvature parameters of −45 and 45, respectively, and the dimensional parameters of each part are marked in detail, including the mainstream, coolant, substrate and TBCs. The flat and curved models are characterized by Cartesian and cylindrical co­ ordinate systems, respectively. The thickness of the TC and BC are set to 0.25 mm and 0.125 mm, respectively. Due to the fact that the roughness of TGO affects only the stress level around the cooling hole, rather than the location of stress concentration [36], TGO is simplified as a smooth surface. Since the duration of a single cycle is short, the growth of TGO is neglected. The thickness of TGO is set to 0.01 mm to simulate the stress distribution under critical spalling conditions [37,38]. The parameters for the tested cases are summarized in Table 1 [32], where p represents the pitch of the cooling hole and α denotes the angle of the cooling hole. Both the solid and fluid domains are meshed using the high-quality hexahedral grids. To further refine the mesh, the O-grid is implemented in and around the cooling hole. The mesh models of the solid domain, fluid domain and the detailed mesh pattern around the cooling hole are shown in Fig. 3, respectively. In order to avoid the occurrence of stress singularity, the mesh independence is verified. The total mesh number is about 8 million for each case, with a minimum mesh quality of 0.6. In addition, the meshes near the boundary layer are refined to ensure that the Y+ of the surface meet the requirements of the turbulence model. 2.2. Simulation method and parameter definition The heat transfer of TBC-film cooling system is calculated using the conjugate heat transfer (CHT) method, including three heat transfer processes: flow and heat transfer in external domain and internal cooling passages, and conduction within blade structure [39]. In the conjugate process, the calculation of external and internal flow and heat transfer is combined with blade conduction. At the coupling surface, the temper­ ature and heat flux meet the following continuous boundary conditions Fig. 1. Models with different curvatures: (a) flat model; (b) concave model; (c) convex model. L. Liu et al.

[PAGE 3] Surface & Coatings Technology 470 (2023) 129826 3 [39]: Tf = Ts (1) −λf ∂Tf ∂n = λs∂Ts ∂n (2) where Tf and Ts are the temperatures of the fluid and solid domains at the coupling surface, respectively; λf and λs are the thermal conductivity of the fluid and solid domains, respectively; and n represents the normal direction. The radiation heat transfer needs to be considered in numerical calculation because of the high environment temperature. The discrete ordinate (DO) radiative model is employed to solve the radiative transfer equation. By solving the equations of radiative transfer for a finite number of discrete solid angles related to a direction vector s→(x1, x2, x3), the model achieves the calculation of radiation energy, and has good applicability to the TBC-film cooling system [40,41]. Assuming that the system is exposed to incident radiation from a blackbody environment, the emissivity of the fluid domain surrounding the system is set to 1. The emissivity of the BC and substrate is set to 0.8 [40]. The ceramic TC is assumed to be a semi-transparent material, with specific parameters provided in [40]. Coolant to mainstream mass flux ratio (commonly referred to as blowing ratio) M is used to describe the characteristics of flow, which is defined as follows: Fig. 2. Finite element models: with a curvature parameter of (a) −45 and (b) 45, respectively. Table 1 Summary of tested cases parameters [32]. Case 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Surface Flat Concave Convex 2r/d ∞ −45 −60 −75 −90 45 60 75 90 p/d 3 α 35◦ d (mm) 1 Fig. 3. Finite element mesh model: (a) central section of the overall model; (b) local details of the solid domain and the cooling hole. L. Liu et al.

[PAGE 4] Surface & Coatings Technology 470 (2023) 129826 4 M = ρcUc ρ∞U∞ (3) where ρc and Uc are the density and velocity of the coolant, and ρ∞ and U∞ are the density and velocity of the mainstream. 2.3. Materials and boundary conditions In the finite element model above, each layer of the solid material is defined as an isotropic homogeneous material. The TC layer is treated as an elastic material, whereas other layers are treated as elastoplastic materials characterized by the ideal elastoplastic constitutive model. The material parameters related to temperature are listed in Table 2 [5,42]. The boundary conditions are set based on the actual operating con­ ditions of a certain type gas turbine [5,43], as shown in Fig. 4. The inlet of the mainstream is configured as the velocity boundary, the temper­ ature of mainstream is 1561 K, the gauge pressure is 2.3 MPa, and the velocity is 200 m/s. The inlet of coolant is set as the pressure boundary, the coolant temperature is 800 K, and the total pressure is constantly adjusted to ensure that M is constant at 2 under all cases. The outlet gauge pressure is set to 2.3 MPa. The free-stream turbulent intensities of both the mainstream and the coolant are set as 10 %. Take the flat model as an example, the coolant and the solid surfaces along the X axis are set as symmetrical boundaries, and the surfaces perpendicular to the Z axis are set as translational periodic boundaries, with a translational length of 3d. The interface of different domains is set as the coupling boundary, and the other surfaces are assumed to be adiabatic. Solutions were obtained using the shear stress transport (SST) model. According to the reported results, the SST model has better performance compared to SA, RNG, k-ε turbulence models [44]. The calculation method adopts the couple algorithm, and the research state is steady state. When the residuals of each item are lower than 10−4 and the temperature of the monitoring point no longer changes, the calculation is considered to be converged [45]. 2.4. Experimental validation The numerical method in this paper is verified using the reported high temperature experiments [46]. In their experiments, the tempera­ ture and velocity of the mainstream are 1082.15 K and 15.5 m/s, respectively, while the temperature and velocity of the coolant are 689.15 K and 10 m/s, respectively. The emissivity of the inlet of the mainstream channel and the plate are set to 0.5 and 0.8, respectively. The emissivities of the other walls are set to 1. Fig. 5 shows the finite element model and the comparison results of the temperature distribu­ tion at ten measuring points along the centerline on the top and bottom surfaces of the plate. The CFD simulation results are in good agreement with the experimental data, and the relative error is less than 0.6 %, which indicates the reasonability and validity of the finite element method. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Steady-state temperature The temperature distribution of the fluid domain and solid domain on the XY section, as well as the upper surface of the coating under various cases, are shown in Figs. 6 and 7. These figures reveal the characteristics of the heat transfer and flow in the system. The substrate and coating experience significant temperature gradients in all di­ rections due to the effects of mainstream and coolant, particularly in proximity to the cooling hole, which will cause significant stress con­ centration. The temperature difference in the solid domain throughout the thickness direction is approximately 40 K. The coating's thermal insulation temperature is about 30 K, with the insulation effect deteri­ orating in closer proximity to the cooling hole. It can be seen from Fig. 7 that under the condition of M = 2, for the flat model, the coolant first separates from the wall, and then falls back as the distance increases. For the curved model, it can be observed that most of the concave models exhibit better cooling performance under high blowing ratios, which is consistent with the findings of Ito et al. [33]. The coolant is affected by two opposite forces, cross-stream pres­ sure gradients and centrifugal forces during the flow process. The magnitude of the two forces depends on the curvature of the substrate and the blowing ratio, and determines the flow path of the coolant [22,33]. The small pressure near the cooling hole of the convex model resulted in a large momentum of the coolant. This heightened mo­ mentum leads to a centrifugal force that exceeds the cross-stream pressure gradient, thereby increasing the separation between the coolant and the wall. Ultimately, this results in a decrease in cooling efficiency. Nonetheless, it is not an absolute rule, as evidenced by the opposite cooling trend observed in the concave model with a curvature parameter of −90 and the convex model with a curvature parameter of 90. This observation highlights the existence of a critical value for ma­ trix curvature, beyond which the convex model outperforms the concave model in terms of cooling efficiency. Further calculations prove that the critical curvature value is dependent on the blowing ratio, and a definitive relationship between these parameters could prove instru­ mental in guiding blade design. Figs. 8(a) and 8(b) depict the temperature distribution along the center line of the concave and convex coating surfaces, respectively. In Fig. 8 (a), it is obvious that temperature platforms are present in the upstream area of the cooling hole in concave model, where the tem­ perature drops slowly, while the flat and convex models do not exhibit this characteristic. This is because the concave shape causes the main­ stream to impact the wall in this region, disrupting the boundary layer and enhancing the heat transfer, thereby resulting in a slower temper­ ature drop. In the downstream area of the cooling hole, the temperature initially increases and then decreases, since the coolant path coincides with the concave substrate and falls back onto the coating surface under the combined action of cross-stream pressure gradients and centrifugal forces. In Fig. 8 (b), the coolant also falls back on a convex model with the curvature parameter of 90, causing a downward trend of tempera­ ture downstream. However, as the curvature of convex model increases, the coolant gradually moves further away from the wall influenced by Table 2 Materials properties used in the finite element model [5,42]. Parameters Sub BC TGO TC Temperature, K 293–1373 293–1373 293–1373 293–1373 Density, kg/m3 8500 7380 3984 3610 Specific heat, J/(kg•K) 440 450 755 505 Thermal conductivity, W/(m•K) 88–69 5.8–17 10–4.1 2–1.7 Thermal expansion coefficient, 10−5/ K 1.48–1.80 1.36–1.76 0.80–0.96 0.90–1.22 Young's modulus, GPa 220–120 200–110 400–320 48–22 Poisson's ratio 0.31–0.35 0.30–0.33 0.23–0.25 0.10–0.12 Yield stress, GPa 0.76–0.54 1.1–0.01 1.2 / L. Liu et al.

[PAGE 5] Surface & Coatings Technology 470 (2023) 129826 5 the cross-stream pressure gradients and centrifugal forces, resulting in a higher downstream temperature. Therefore, there is a difference in the temperature trend downstream of the cooling hole between the model with a curvature parameter of 90 and other convex models. The rela­ tionship between the substrate curvature and cooling efficiency is re­ flected in these two figures, whereby under the conditions of M = 2, the larger the curvature of the concave model, the better the cooling effect, while the opposite is true for the convex model. 3.2. Characteristics of equivalent stress In this study, the stress distributions within multi-layer TBCs are focused, and the interface stresses are emphasized, because they may lead to interfacial and edge cracks in TBCs. It is assumed that the coating Fig. 4. Boundary conditions of the computational domain in CFD modeling, using a flat model for example. Fig. 5. Validation of the numerical method with the experimental data [46]: (a) finite element model; (b) comparison of test and CFD results; (c) temperature distribution obtained by CFD. L. Liu et al.

[PAGE 6] Surface & Coatings Technology 470 (2023) 129826 6 is stress-free after deposition process in this work. While it is known that coatings are subject to processing-induced residual stresses, it is also known that residual compressive stresses in the coating plane for as- plasma sprayed coatings are on the order of 3 MPa when the deposi­ tion temperature is controlled to 260 ◦C or less [47]. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the residual stress of the coating is zero at room temperature [48]. The steady-state residual stress of the TBC-film cooling system at high temperature is calculated, and the equivalent stress distributions at different interfaces with curvature parameters of −45 and 45 are shown in Fig. 9. It can be seen that stress concentration occurs around the cooling hole at each interface due to the temperature gradient and free-edge effect, while the stress far away from the cooling hole is at a lower level. In the TC layer, the equivalent stress of the concave model is lower than that of the convex model, which is closely related to the cooling efficiency. In the BC layer, the opposite is true because the yield stress of BC decreases sharply with temperature. The BC layer around the cooling hole has reached a yield state, and the maximum stress is the yield stress at that temperature. The convex model has a higher temperature and thus presents a lower equivalent stress. At steady state, the maximum equivalent stress appears at the edge of the cooling hole at the TC/TGO interface, indicating that this area is prone to accumulate damage and failure. The equivalent stress distributions along the center line of TC/TGO and TGO/BC interface are shown in Fig. 10. Due to the significant stress concentration at positions A and B, situated at the left and right edges of the cooling hole, the equivalent stresses at the two positions of each interface are illustrated in Fig. 11. The equivalent stress at the TC/TGO interface is higher than that at the TGO/BC interface at all positions along the centerline. And the stress level at position A is slightly higher than that at position B. Additionally, there is a clear association between equivalent stress and curvature. For the concave model, the equivalent stress at the TC/TGO interface decreases with increasing curvature, while the TGO/BC interface shows the opposite trend near the cooling hole due to the yield effect of BC. For the convex model, the equivalent stress at the TC/TGO interface increases with increasing curvature, and the trend is also reversed at the TGO/BC interface due to the yield effect. The equivalent stress at the interface with the curvature parameter of −90 is higher than that at the flat model, demonstrating the influence of the temperature field on the stress level. In addition, the growth of TGO is one of the most important factors leading to coating failure. The thickness of TGO affects interface stress, which can result in delamination and cracking of the coating. In order to study the effect of TGO growth, a finite element model with a 5 μm- thickness TGO was established and compared for analysis, as shown in Fig. 12. It was found that the growth of TGO at the TC/TGO interface leaded to an increase in interface stress, regardless of the convex or concave model. At the TGO/BC interface, an increase in TGO thickness was observed to cause an increase in interface stress at locations away from the cooling hole. However, near the cooling hole, the stress levels of models with different TGO thicknesses were relatively similar due to the yield effect of the BC layer. 3.3. Characteristics of normal stress The determination of coating failure cannot only focus on the equivalent stress. Based on the Traction-separation law [49], the critical energy release rate Gc can be defined as: Gnc = 1 / 2σ0 nδ0 n (5) Gsc = 1 / 2σ0 sδ0 s (6) where Gnc and Gsc are the normal and tangential critical energy release rates, respectively. σ0 n and σ0 s are the breaking strength in normal and tangential direction, respectively. δ0 n and δ0 s are the fracture displace­ ment in normal and tangential direction, respectively. The competition between the two leads to the initiation of cracks. As the view put forward by Hsueh et al. [14], the normal stress (peeling stress) perpendicular to the interface and the in-plane shear stress generated near the free edge of TBC may be the driving forces of model I and model II edge delamination, respectively. Therefore, this section studied the normal stress perpendicular to the interface, which is in the X-direction of the cylindrical coordinate system. The normal stress dis­ tributions at different interfaces with curvature parameters of −45 and 45 are shown in Fig. 13. It can be observed that, in all cases, the normal stress is also concentrated at the edge of the cooling hole. Compared with the TC/TGO interface, the TGO/BC interface exhibits higher tensile peel stresses on both sides of the cooling hole, and due to yielding, the stress in the concave model is higher than that in the convex model. This indicates that model I interface cracks are more likely to occur at the TGO/BC interface of the concave model, leading to coating spallation. The normal stress distributions along the center line of TC/TGO and TGO/BC interface are shown in Fig. 14. The normal stress of positions A and B is visually depicted in Fig. 15. It can be seen that the magnitude of the normal stress at position B is greater than A. Position A, upstream of the cooling hole, is under compressive stress, which inhibits the initia­ tion of model I edge cracks, while position B is under tensile stress, which easily leads to the initiation of model I edge cracks. Thus, the coating is more prone to peeling at the TGO/BC interface at the down­ stream edge of the cooling hole. The normal stress in the region far away from the cooling hole increase with the increase of curvature, and its orientation is strongly associated with the curvature parameter. For the flat model, the normal stress tends to approach zero. For the concave model, the normal stress is positive, making the coating more suscep­ tible to peeling. For the convex model, the normal stress is negative, which hinders the development of peeling. However, around the cooling holes, the relationship between the normal stress and the curvature changes due to the interference of the complex temperature field and Fig. 6. The temperature distribution of the fluid domain and solid domain on the XY section: (a) flat model; (b) concave model; (c) convex model. L. Liu et al.