[PAGE 1] Published in Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 35566 (2016) doi:10.1038/srep35566 1 Diamond photonics platform enabled by femtosecond laser writing Belén Sotillo1, Vibhav Bharadwaj1, J. P. Hadden2, Masaaki Sakakura4, Andrea Chiappini3, Toney Teddy Fernandez1, Stefano Longhi1, Ottavia Jedrkiewicz5, Yasuhiko Shimotsuma4, Luigino Criante6, Roberto Osellame7, Gianluca Galzerano7, Maurizio Ferrari3, Kiyotaka Miura4, Roberta Ramponi7, Paul E. Barclay2, Shane Michael Eaton1,* 1Dipartimento di Fisica, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy 2Institute for Quantum Science and Technology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada 3Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN)-CNR, CSMFO and FBK-CMM, Trento, Italy 4Office of Society-Academia Collaboration for Innovation and Department of Material Chemistry, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. 5IFN-CNR and CNISM Udr Como, Como, Italy 6Center for Nano Science and Technology, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Milano, Italy 7IFN – CNR, Milano, Italy *shanemichael.eaton@polimi.it

[PAGE 2] Published in Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 35566 (2016) doi:10.1038/srep35566 2 Abstract Diamond is a promising platform for sensing and quantum processing owing to the remarkable properties of the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) impurity. The electrons of the NV center, largely localized at the vacancy site, combine to form a spin triplet, which can be polarized with 532-nm laser light, even at room temperature. The NV's states are isolated from environmental perturbations making their spin coherence comparable to trapped ions. An important breakthrough would be in connecting, using waveguides, multiple diamond NVs together optically. However, still lacking is an efficient photonic fabrication method for diamond akin to the photolithographic methods that have revolutionized silicon photonics. Here, we report the first demonstration of three dimensional buried optical waveguides in diamond, inscribed by focused femtosecond high repetition rate laser pulses. Within the waveguides, high quality NV properties are observed, making them promising for integrated magnetometer or quantum information systems on a diamond chip.

[PAGE 3] Published in Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 35566 (2016) doi:10.1038/srep35566 3 Introduction Usually admired for its beauty, diamond has other important qualities for technological applications: it is the hardest naturally occurring substance, offers high thermal conductivity and is transparent to ultraviolet light. Researchers recently discovered that diamond is an ideal substrate for spintronics and quantum information thanks to the properties of the nitrogen- vacancy (NV) center1,2. The negatively charged NV center impurity comprises a nitrogen atom adjacent to a vacancy. The electrons of the NV form a spin triplet, which can be polarized even at room temperature. One of the spin states ﬂuoresces more brightly than the others which can be exploited for spin readout, with spin coherence times (~1 ms) comparable to trapped ions3. These properties make NVs attractive as a scalable platform for efficient sensing based on electron spins4 and for quantum information systems5. Applications such as magnetic field sensing and coherent storage of light would benefit from the enhanced interaction provided by optical waveguides containing NVs6. Fabrication of waveguides in diamond to connect NVs is also compelling for long-range quantum entanglement7. However, it remains a significant challenge to fabricate optical waveguides in single-crystal diamond. To harness the potential of diamond NVs, a fabrication toolkit similar to the one that has revolutionized silica planar lightwave circuits8 and silicon photonics9 is desirable. Optical waveguiding has been realized using a high refractive index material on a diamond substrate10,11, but is limited by weak evanescent coupling to NVs near the surface. Single-crystal thin diamond films for waveguiding can be generated using the ion implantation assisted lift-off method12, however the films suffer from residual stress which is detrimental for the fabrication of photonic structures, and NV centers within them often suffer

[PAGE 4] Published in Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 35566 (2016) doi:10.1038/srep35566 4 from spectral diffusion due to charge traps on the surface13. Another approach uses heterogeneous diamond growth followed by oxygen plasma etching to create membranes to fabricate photonic crystals14 and ring resonators15,16, however it is difficult to remove tens of microns of diamond while maintaining smooth features needed for photonics applications. Using an angled plasma etching process, suspended triangular nanobeam waveguides were recently demonstrated14,17 with losses < 10 dB/cm at visible wavelengths however for each design, a custom Faraday cage is required. Waveguides have also been demonstrated in diamond using isotropic etching18 and ion beam writing19 but as with other methods, optical circuits are restricted to 2D geometries. We propose a disruptive technology using femtosecond laser writing to realize a 3D photonics toolkit for diamond. In this method, focused ultrashort pulses are nonlinearly absorbed in the bulk of a transparent material, leading to a localized modification20. In glasses this modification is a refractive index increase which enables 3D waveguide writing20-28 but in crystals, the lattice is damaged yielding a decrease in refractive index22. Here, we laser-write closely spaced parallel lines in diamond to confine a guided optical mode between them. The high repetition rate of 500 kHz was found to reduce the formation of highly absorptive graphite, enabling optical waveguiding. Crucially, we find high quality NV center properties within the guiding region. Optical waveguides formed by directly focused femtosecond laser pulses can potentially be patterned in three dimensions to optically link or address NVs, to enable efficient excitation and collection, and make quantum information systems and spin- based sensing a reality.

[PAGE 5] Published in Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 35566 (2016) doi:10.1038/srep35566 5 Results The effect of repetition rate on bulk modification of diamond The initial focus of our study was to produce uniform modification lines below the surface of diamond, which could be used to form optical waveguides. At 500 kHz repetition rate, we found that an average power of 50 mW and a scan speed of 0.5 mm/s along <110> crystallographic directions produced uniform and reproducible modifications in the bulk of diamond. As shown in the optical microscope image in Fig. 1(a), the cross section of the laser-written track was approximately 5 μm transversely and 22 μm vertically. The significant vertical elongation of the line is attributed to the large spherical aberration caused by the mismatch between the index matching oil (n = 1.5) and diamond (n = 2.4). This asymmetry in the modification could be corrected using adaptive optics29. To better understand the structure of the femtosecond laser-written lines, μRaman spectroscopy was performed. As a reference, the pristine diamond30 has a characteristic Raman peak centered at 1332 cm-1 with a typical FWHM of around 2.3 cm-1. For the above mentioned laser processing conditions, μRaman characterization (Fig. 1(b)) revealed that within the modification, there is a reduction of the intensity of the peak at 1332 cm-1 to 15% of the original intensity along with an increase of its width by about 2 cm-1, evidencing increased disorder in the diamond lattice. Moreover, at least two new bands appear: the G- peak at 1575 cm-1 and the D-peak at 1360 cm-1, showing a transformation of the sp3 bonding of diamond into sp2 bonding. In our case, the widths of D and G peaks (greater than 100 cm-1) and the intensity ratio between them (I(D)/I(G) less and close to 1) indicate that these sp2 clusters are mainly in an amorphous carbon phase rather than graphite31. This is in contrast to previous work with 1-kHz repetition rate Ti:Sapphire femtosecond lasers32, which

[PAGE 6] Published in Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 35566 (2016) doi:10.1038/srep35566 6 demonstrated the formation of micrographitic lines in diamond, which are not desirable for photonic devices due to the strong absorption. In fact, when we reduce the repetition rate from 500 kHz to 5 kHz, we observe a sharper G-peak with a slight displacement to higher wavenumber (Fig. 1(c)), which implies a greater concentration of nanocrystalline graphite clusters33. We also found that the second order peaks at 2700 cm-1 (2 D peak) and 2900 cm-1 (D + G peak) appear for 5 and 25 kHz, but not for 500 kHz, evidencing increased graphitization at these lower repetition rates. Compared to the laser repetition rate, we found that the pulse energy and scan speed played a lesser role in the amount of graphitization. Bulk optical waveguiding in diamond Motivated by the μRaman results at 500 kHz repetition rate, we attempted to form waveguides in diamond using the type II method to produce an optical waveguide between two closely inscribed modification lines22. Figure 2(a) shows the transverse optical microscope image of the pair of laser-inscribed lines written 50 μm below the surface using the same laser processing conditions as the single line in Fig. 1(a). For 13-μm line separation, we produced for the first time to our knowledge, a buried optical waveguide in diamond using femtosecond laser writing. While the waveguide showed single mode behavior when scanning the input launch fiber transversely, when scanned vertically, modes could be excited at three different depths: the lowest loss mode was centered between the modification lines, as shown in Fig. 2(a). A mode could also be excited a few microns above and below this position (not shown in Fig. 2(a)). The mode field diameter (MFD) of the central and lowest loss mode is 10 μm × 11 μm at 635 nm wavelength with an insertion loss of 14 dB using butt-coupled single mode fibers (including a coupling loss of 2.8 dB/facet, Fresnel reflection loss of 0.3 dB/facet