[PAGE 1] arXiv:1806.02226v1 [physics.ins-det] 6 Jun 2018 Performance of CVD Diamond Single Crystals as Side-bounce Monochromators in the Laue Geometry at High Photon Energies ∗ S. Stoupin1,a), T. Krawczyk1, J.P.C. Ruﬀ1, K.D. Finkelstein1, H.H. Lee2 and R. Huang1 1Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA 2Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Pohang 37673, Korea a)Corresponding author: sstoupin@cornell.edu Abstract. We report on performance of chemical vapor deposited (CVD) single crystal diamond plates as side bounce monochro- mators for high photon energies (≳20 keV) in the Laue geometry. Several crystals were tested in-operando high-heat-load condi- tions at A1 undulator station of Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source. Up to 10× enhancement in the reﬂected x-ray ﬂux was observed compared to that delivered by IIa diamond plates grown by high-pressure high-temperature method. Wavefront distor- tions were measured using analyzer-based x-ray diﬀraction imaging. Focusing of a portion of the reﬂected beam was demonstrated using Pt-coated mono capillary optics at a photon energy of 46 keV. INTRODUCTION Diamond is a very attractive material for high-heat-load x-ray monochromators due to its superior thermal properties and high radiation hardness. For a perfect crystal the fraction of radiation selected, and the resulting reﬂected ﬂux are rather small due to the narrowness of the intrinsic angular-wavelength reﬂection region deﬁned by the Darwin width. Distortions in the crystal lattice of a chemically vapor deposited (CVD) diamond may enable selection of a greater fraction of incoming radiation from a polychromatic and/or divergent incident radiation compared to that of perfect single crystals. Reﬂectivity of CVD diamond has been studied earlier for applications in neutron monochromators [1, 2, 3]. It was found that although reﬂectivity for neutrons can be predictably quantiﬁed the result may depend on variations in the diamond microstructure, which was deduced from x-ray reﬂectivity measurements. For high-heat-load x-ray monochromators operating at high photon energies (E ≳20 keV) the transmission (Laue) diﬀraction geometry1 (as opposed to the reﬂection (Bragg) geometry) oﬀers an advantage of limiting the in- cident beam footprint on the entrance crystal surface for the most eﬃcient low-index reﬂections with shallow Bragg angles. Absolute reﬂectivity of CVD single crystal diamond plates was recently studied both theoretically (Darwin- Hamilton intensity transport equations) and experimentally (using double-crystal diﬀractometry and rocking curve imaging) [4]. It was shown that integrated reﬂectivity in the Laue geometry of CVD diamond crystals with a ho- mogeneous distribution of mosaic blocks can exceed that of a perfect crystal by at least one order of magnitude. The homogeneous distribution of defects can be deﬁned as an ensemble of mosaic blocks of certain characteristic thickness and angular misorientation. Availability of crystal volumes, where this description is valid was demonstrated. In this work we study CVD diamond crystal plates as side-bounce Laue high-heat-load monochromators. Using geometric optics and basic x-ray diﬀraction considerations we derive criteria on the optimal use of imperfect crystals for this application. Several CVD plates were subjected to in-operando tests using synchrotron undulator radiaiton. An increase in the reﬂected x-ray ﬂux of up to about one order of magnitude compared to the levels provided by HPHT ∗submitted for publication to AIP Conf. Proc. (Proc. of International Conference on Synchrotron Radiation Instrumentation 2018) 1In the Laue geometry the exit surface of the crystal for the reﬂected beam is opposite to that of the entrance surface

[PAGE 2] crystal plates2 of much higher crystal quality was demonstrated. In-operando tests of crystal plates were performed at A1 undulator station of Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). Analyzer based diﬀraction imaging yielded quantitative results on the intrinsic radiation bandwidth of the reﬂected beams and wavefront distortions. In addition, moderate focusing of the CVD-plate-reﬂected x-ray beam was explored using Pt-coated capillary at a high photon energy of 46 keV. The size of the focused beam was found to be close to the nominal focusing parameters of the capillary while the focused x-ray ﬂux was about 1×1010 photons/s. GENERAL REMARKS A horizontal side-bounce Laue diamond monochromator is a simple solution for monochromatization of x-rays at synchrotron radiation sources. Among advantages of this approach is stability, aﬀordability, and eﬃcient use of avail- able facility space. These advantages come at a price of limited energy tunability and reduced integrated throughput due to Bragg diﬀraction of π-polarized radiation (polarization of synchrotron beam in the horizontal scattering plane). The spectral throughput is further limited by the choice of Laue geometry. Reﬂectivity of a perfect crystal in the Laue geometry is an oscillating function, which is extremely sensitive to micron level variations in crystal thickness (e.g., [5]). In the limit of a thick nonabsorbing crystal the maximum reﬂectivity in the Laue case approaches 1/2 (e.g., [6]). This limit is a good approximation for low order reﬂections for hard x-rays in diamond crystals of moderate thickness 0.5-1 mm.3 These considerations suggest that a side-bounce diamond monochromator is not the best choice for spectroscopy applications. However, for other applications developments of side-bounce monochromators can be aimed at optimization of the integrated throughput. A side-bounce crystal monochromator can select a greater fraction of photon energy bandwidth from the incident polychromatic beam, which could result in an overall increase in the reﬂected x-ray ﬂux (despite reduced spectral throughput). BANDWIDTH OF REFLECTED RADIATION. SOURCE SIZE LIMIT. Within the framework of geometric optics if a polychromatic x-ray beam emanating from a point source with angular divergence ψ is incident on a crystal aligned to hkl reﬂection, the photon energy bandwidth of the reﬂected x-ray beam can be approximated with ∆E E = s ψ2 tan2 θhkl + ε2 hkl, (1) where θhkl is the angle corresponding to the center of the reﬂection region (or Bragg angle to a good approxima- tion), and εhkl is the intrinsic relative bandwidth of the reﬂection. If, additionally, the source has a ﬁnite size in the scattering plane sh, each point on the crystal sees x-ray divergence of ψ0 = sh L , (2) where L is the distance from source to the crystal. For estimation of the total bandwidth in Eq. 1 ψ should be replaced with q ψ2 + ψ2 0. Considering horizontal source sizes of 3rd generation synchrotrons (200 - 600 µm) and source-to-monochromator distances of about 30 m, ψ0 can be from a few to a few tens of microradians. If, additionally, high photon energies and shallow Bragg angles are considered tan θhkl ≃0.1, the contribution of the source size to the bandwidth can become dominant if compared to the intrinsic bandwidth of hkl reﬂections in a perfect diamond crystal (εhkl < ε111 ≃5 × 10−5). In some cases (e.g., relatively short beamlines of CHESS L ≃15m and even greater sh ≃1000 µm) the inﬂuence of the intrinsic bandwidth can be neglected. Even the reﬂected beam is apertured/collimated to minimize the source divergence ψ, the total radiation bandwidth is still quite considerable ∆E/E ≃1 × 10−3. However, the smallness of εhkl limits the total radiation ﬂux selected by the reﬂection. The size of the reﬂection region in the angular-wavelength space for entrance waves is quite narrow as shown in Fig. 1(a) (i.e., Dumond diagram). A reﬂection region of an imperfect crystal if approximated as an ensemble of misoriented blocks 2IIa type diamond crystals grown using high-pressure high-temperature method 3Much thinner crystal plates as side-bounce monochromators are expected to be susceptible to heat-load-induced thermal distortion (due to a substantial reduction in stiﬀness).

[PAGE 3] of eﬀective angular misorientation ρ ≫εhkl tan θhkl can be illustrated in the angular-wavelength space for entrance waves as a superposition of narrow reﬂection regions of individual blocks (see [7] for more details). These regions are shifted in the angular coordinate with respect to the central reﬂection angle, which results in a greater combined eﬀective bandwidth ε′ hkl ≃ρ/ tan θhkl (Fig. 1(b)). Performance of such a crystal as a monochromator will be optimized if ρ ≃ψ0 ≃ψ, (3) or, alternatively, ε′ hkl ≃ ψ0 tan θhkl ≃ ψ tan θhkl , (4) FIGURE 1. Angular-wavelength reﬂection regions of an hkl reﬂection: for a perfect crystal (a), and, for an imperfect crystal (b). The latter can be represented as a superposition of reﬂection regions for an ensemble of perfect crystals shifted along the angular axis (θ) by the amount of their angular misorientations, which are bound to a certain limiting value ρ. HIGH-HEAT-LOAD SIDE-BOUNCE DIAMOND MONOCHROMATOR. A pair of diamond crystal plates was installed in a water-cooled copper block of a side-bounce monochromator using the thermal mounting approach [8]. Aluminum ﬁxtures were used to restrain displacements of the plates and In foil was applied on edges. The crystals were attached by and the thermal contact was made solely by the In foil following the procedure developed by Yabashi et al. [8]. The monochromator was operated at A1 undulator beamline of CHESS. The schematic of the monochromator is shown in Fig. 2. At right, the undulator beam of another station (A2) passes through an opening in the water-cooled copper block while the A1 undulator beam strikes predominantly one of the two diamond crystals centered on the incident beam using a horizontal translation stage. Some overlap is unavoidable due to the tails of radiation distribution in the horizontal plane. The angular positions of the crystals were pre-adjusted to be in close proximity of the 111 reﬂection (for one of the diamond plates) and of the 220 reﬂection for the other. A small angular oﬀset (≃1 deg.) is introduced between the two to facilitate rejection of the unwanted reﬂection using downstream apertures. The angular range of rotation of the copper block permits ﬁnal crystal alignment to the nominal scattering angle of the beamline 2θn ≃17.4 deg yielding nominal working photon energies of 19.9 keV (111 reﬂection) and 32.5 keV (220 reﬂection). First, crystal plates CVD-1 and CVD-2 were tested in-operando conditions of the monochromator using full undulator beam delivered by CHESS compact undulator. In the second experiment these were replaced with crystals grown by high-pressure high-temperature method (HPHT-1 and HPHT-2) using the same 111 and 220 working reﬂections. These crystals, although still imperfect, had substantially smaller concentration of defects, which was veriﬁed using white beam topography (an experiment conducted at 1-BM beamline of the Advanced Photon Source). In the third experiment, the second crystal was replaced with a CVD plate set in 400 Laue reﬂection (CVD-3). All crystal plates had thickness of about 0.6 mm and (001) surface orientation. The 220 and 400 were symmetric Laue reﬂections while the 111 reﬂection was slightly asymmetric (asymmetry angle ≃54.7 deg.) and

[PAGE 4] set in the beam compressing geometry. The monochromator was operated at A1 station of CHESS over the course of about two years delivering monochromatic radiation for user experiments involving experimental techniques such as thin-ﬁlm and single crystal diﬀraction, powder diﬀraction, wide-angle x-ray scattering as well as x-ray ﬂuorescence mapping experiments with moderate spatial resolution (≃25×25 µm2). FIGURE 2. Schematic of the diamond monochromator (see text for details). For each crystal plate/reﬂection, measurements of total (unapertured) ﬂux of the reﬂected beams were performed using Ar ﬁlled ionization chamber. The results of these measurements along with theoretical estimates are shown in Table 1. The theoretical estimates were obtained using SPECTRA software [9] to generate partial undulator ﬂux of the CHESS compact undulator [10] and x-ray dynamical diﬀraction for perfect crystals combined with ray-tracing approach (assuming Gaussian shape of the x-ray beam) to calculate throughput of the monochromator. The measured values of the total ﬂux for CVD crystal plates were consistently greater than the theoretical values for perfect crystals. These theoretical values are prone to overestimation (e.g., due to non-ideal performance of the x-ray source). Com- paring experimentally measured ﬂux values of for CVD and HPHT crystals a gain of about 10× is observed for the 111 reﬂection and about 5× for the 220 reﬂection. At the same time, it is expected that use of imperfect crystals as x-ray reﬂectors inevitably leads to distortion of radiation wavefront due to local deviations from the x-ray diﬀraction condition. Therefore, only a portion of the total ﬂux can be eﬃciently delivered to the sample in an experiment using downstream focusing optics with a limited working aperture. Focusing aberrations due to the distorted wavefront are expected. In the following we describe studies of the radiation wavefront and results of focusing using mono capillary optics. TABLE 1. Diamond plate performance characteristics. Diamond plate Reﬂection hkl Photon energy [keV] Ft ∗ [ph/s] Fe† [ph/s] ρm ∗∗ [µrad] ε′ hkl εhkl CVD-1 111 19.9 6.5×1012 3.2×1013 71 4.6×10−4 5.4×10−5 CVD-2 220 32.5 1.0×1012 2.7×1012 94 6.2×10−4 1.8×10−5 HPHT-1 111 19.9 6.5×1012 2.3×1012 26 1.7×10−4 5.4×10−5 HPHT-2 220 32.5 1.0×1012 5.6×1011 17 1.1×10−4 1.8×10−5 CVD-3 400 46.0 1.6×1011 3.8×1011 42 2.7×10−4 7.3×10−6 ∗Total ﬂux using theoretical calculations. † Experimentally measured total ﬂux. ∗∗Average width (FWHM) of the local reﬂectivity curve in the ∆θσ topographs (e.g., Fig. 3(c-d))

[PAGE 5] WAVEFRONT CHARACTERIZATION In-operando wavefront characterization in the horizontal scattering plane of the monochromator crystals was per- formed using diﬀraction imaging ([7]) in the nondispersive double-crystal arrangement, where 0.5-mm-thick Si wafer was chosen as the analyzer (second) crystal. For brevity, we show results only for diamond plates CVD-1 and CVD- 2. The experimental arrangements for evaluation of performance of diamond crystal plates CVD-1 and CVD-2 are shown schematically in Fig.3(a) and (b), respectively. In each case, an analyzer reﬂection was chosen with a d-spacing approximately matching that of the working diamond reﬂection. Sequences of images of the beam reﬂected from the analyzer crystal were collected using an area detector (at a distance of about 2 m from the monochromator) at dif- ferent angular positions of the analyzer over its rocking curve. These images were processed on per-pixel basis to calculate rocking curve topographs representing maps of the integrated reﬂected intensity normalized by the maxi- mum value observed (Iint R ), the curve’s peak position (δθm) and the curve’s width as a standard deviation of a Gaussian approximation (∆θσ). The calculated rocking curve topographs are shown in Fig.3(c) for CVD-1 and in Fig.3(d) for CVD-2. The δθm topographs reveal an eﬀect of lattice bending of the entire plate for both crystal plates. Remarkably, the horizontal gradients in these topographs for CVD-1 and CVD-2 have opposite signs. Radiation reﬂected from CVD-1 is defocused while radiation reﬂected from CVD-2 is focused. This is conﬁrmed by change in the horizontal beam footprint. The size of the beam reﬂected from CVD-1 (≃11 mm) in the imaging plane of the detector is about two times the size expected from geometry of the experiment in case of wavefront preservation (≃5 mm). For CVD-2 this size is reduced to about 2 mm. The integrated reﬂectivity is quite nonuniform in both cases (Iint R topographs). Nevertheless, the changes in the beam size are clearly identiﬁed. Using ex-situ rocking curve topography it was found that the observed lattice bending was intrinsically present in both crystal plates at the same levels. Thus, this eﬀect was not dominated by induced strain due to high radiation heat load or crystal mounting. The topographs ∆θσ showing the maps of the curve’s width as standard deviation of a Gaussian approximation yield an estimate for the angular misorientation: ρ ≈2.355×∆θσ. The values averaged across the topographs are shown in Table 1 for all studied crystal plates. For the CVD plates they compare favorably to the source-size divergence of the experiment ψ0 ≃140µrad. The resulting intrinsic relative bandwidths ε′ hkl are also shown in the table. For all studied plates/reﬂections these values were found to be greater than the intrinsic energy width of the perfect crystal εhkl. FOCUSING OF REFLECTED RADIATION USING CAPILLARY OPTICS A 100-mm-long mono capillary with a nominal focal distance of 56 mm delivering a focused beam of a nominal spot size of 25 × 25µm2 (evaluated using optical metrology) was used for focusing x-ray beam reﬂected by plate CVD-3 at 46 keV. The inner surface of the capillary was coated with Pt to improve grazing-incidence reﬂectivity at higher photon energies. The entrance aperture of the capillary had a diameter of about 600 µm and the exit clearance aperture had a diameter of 400 µm. The beam entering the capillary was limited to 600 × 600 µm2 using x-ray slits. The center clearance aperture was blocked using a gold bead of 400 µm diameter centered on the optical axis of the capillary. The alignment of the capillary was optimized using an area detector placed in the focusing plane. The distribution of intensity captured by the detector is shown in Fig. 4(a). Centered beam proﬁles in the horizontal and vertical directions (slices of the intensity distribution) are shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c) respectively. The shapes of the curves are close to Lorentzian with an asymmetric distortion present. A more prominent distortion is observed in the horizontal proﬁle, which could be attributed to the wavefront distortions of the CVD diamond monochromator. However, distortions due to imperfections of the capillary can not be ruled out completely. The width of the horizontal proﬁle was ≃21 µrad (FWHM) and the width of the vertical proﬁle was ≃16 µrad (FWHM). The ﬂux of the focused beam (≃1 × 1010 photons/s) was measured using an ionization chamber placed downstream of the capillary. CONCLUSIONS In summary, increased levels of x-ray ﬂux reﬂected from CVD diamond crystal plates were demonstrated in-operando high-heat-load conditions using the plates as side-bounce monochromator crystals for synchrotron undulator radia- tion. Wavefront distortions were observed due to overall lattice bending intrinsically present in the plates. These severe wavefront distortions could be avoided using preliminary screening of diamond plates for high-heat-load monochro- mator application using lattice strain visualization techniques (e.g., x-ray rocking curve imaging). Moderate focusing

[PAGE 6] (c) (d) (a) (b) FIGURE 3. Experimental arrangement for diﬀraction imaging of radiation wavefront in the horizontal scattering plane: for CVD-1 using Si 220 Laue analyzer at 19.9 keV (a), and for CVD-2 using Si 331 Laue analyzer at 32.5 keV (b). Analyzer rocking curve topographs: obtained using the Si 220 Laue analyzer (c), and using the Si 331 Laue analyzer (d). The rocking curve topographs represent maps of the integrated reﬂected intensity normalized by the maximum value observed (Iint R ), the curve’s peak position (δθm) and the curve’s width as a standard deviation of a Gaussian approximation (∆θσ). The colorbar on the δθm and ∆θσ topographs are in units of µrad. of the reﬂected beams is possible. Beam spot sizes in agreement with nominal characteristics of a focusing element can be achieved, yet the shape of the intensity distribution in the focusing plane could be aﬀected by the wavefront distortions.