[PAGE 1] addenda and errata 850 http://dx.doi.org/10.1107/S1600577516006159 J. Synchrotron Rad. (2016). 23, 850 Received 26 February 2016 Accepted 26 February 2016 Edited by S. M. Heald, Argonne National Laboratory, USA Keywords: diamond two-dimensional lens; X-ray optics; compound refractive lens; laser etching Single-crystal diamond refractive lens for focusing X-rays in two dimensions. Erratum S. Antipov,a* S. V. Baryshev,a J. E. Butler,a,b O. Antipova,c Z. Liud and S. Stoupind* aEuclid Techlabs LLC, Solon, OH 44139, USA, bInstitute of Applied Physics of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia, cDepartment of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616, USA, and dAdvanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. *Correspondence e-mail: s.antipov@euclidtechlabs.com, sstoupin@aps.anl.gov A correction is made to a citation in the article by Antipov et al. (2016) [J. Synchrotron Rad. 23, 163–168]. In the article by Antipov et al. (2016), the citation Polikarpov et al. (2014) is incorrect. The correct citation should read Polikarpov et al. (2015), and the reference is given in full in the list below. References Antipov, S., Baryshev, S. V., Butler, J. E., Antipova, O., Liu, Z. & Stoupin, S. (2016). J. Synchrotron Rad. 23, 163–168. Polikarpov, M., Snigireva, I., Morse, J., Yunkin, V., Kuznetsov, S. & Snigirev, A. (2015). J. Synchrotron Rad. 22, 23–28. ISSN 1600-5775 # 2016 International Union of Crystallography

[PAGE 2] research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2016). 23, 163–168 http://dx.doi.org/10.1107/S1600577515020639 163 Received 4 September 2015 Accepted 30 October 2015 Edited by S. M. Heald, Argonne National Laboratory, USA Keywords: diamond two-dimensional lens; X-ray optics; compound refractive lens; laser etching. Single-crystal diamond refractive lens for focusing X-rays in two dimensions S. Antipov,a* S. V. Baryshev,a J. E. Butler,a,b O. Antipova,c Z. Liud and S. Stoupind* aEuclid Techlabs LLC, Solon, OH 44139, USA, bInstitute of Applied Physics of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia, cDepartment of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616, USA, and dAdvanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. *Correspondence e-mail: s.antipov@euclidtechlabs.com, sstoupin@aps.anl.gov The fabrication and performance evaluation of single-crystal diamond refractive X-ray lenses of which the surfaces are paraboloids of revolution for focusing X-rays in two dimensions simultaneously are reported. The lenses were manufactured using a femtosecond laser micromachining process and tested using X-ray synchrotron radiation. Such lenses were stacked together to form a standard compound refractive lens (CRL). Owing to the superior physical properties of the material, diamond CRLs could become indispensable wavefront-preserving primary focusing optics for X-ray free-electron lasers and the next-generation synchrotron storage rings. They can be used for highly efﬁcient refocusing of the extremely bright X-ray sources for secondary optical schemes with limited aperture such as nanofocusing Fresnel zone plates and multilayer Laue lenses. 1. Introduction The next-generation light sources such as diffraction-limited storage rings and high-repetition-rate free-electron lasers (FELs) will generate X-ray beams with signiﬁcantly increased peak and average brilliance. These future facilities will require X-ray optical components capable of handling large instan- taneous and average power densities while tailoring the properties of the X-ray beams for a variety of scientiﬁc experiments. Since the invention of X-ray compound refractive lenses (CRLs) in the 1990s (Snigirev et al., 1996), refractive X-ray optics has become one of the basic optical elements which couples the primary radiation of the highly brilliant X-ray sources with a variety of X-ray instruments to probe matter on the atomic level. Among the advantages of refractive X-ray optics are the preservation of the X-ray beam trajectory, robustness, compactness and relaxed requirements on surface quality owing to the transmission geometry. Polycrystalline beryllium CRLs are able to stand the full X-ray FEL beam (Schropp et al., 2013), and their commercially available prototypes with parabolic proﬁles (Lengeler et al., 1998, 1999) are successfully used at the third-generation synchrotrons to refocus the X-ray source onto downstream optics. The Be CRLs are used also as transfocators (reconﬁgurable stacks of CRLs) for selection of a photon bandwidth which is compar- able with the bandwidth of high-brilliance undulator-based X-ray sources (Vaughan et al., 2011; Zozulya et al., 2012). However, the choice of polycrystalline beryllium (dictated by very limited availability of high-quality single-crystal material) has limitations. These are the presence of grain boundaries which may distort the radiation wavefront, radiation damage ISSN 1600-5775 # 2016 International Union of Crystallography

[PAGE 3] limitations and environmental concerns (beryllium is highly toxic). The performance of a refractive lens can be improved by minimization of scattering from intrinsic inhomogeneities via a choice of material with low small-angle scattering (Lengeler et al., 1998). This also suggests the preference of a single crystal over a polycrystalline material for lens fabrica- tion. It is therefore imperative to develop the next-generation X-ray optics suitable for operation at the increased levels of X-ray power density. Diamond has been the material of choice for several important high-heat-load applications in X-ray optics including double-crystal monochromators (Berman et al., 1993; Freund, 1995; Fernandez et al., 1997) and Bragg mirrors for the X-ray free-electron laser oscillator (Shvyd’ko et al., 2010, 2011). Beyond that, it has been recently shown that diamond X-ray optics can withstand the direct X-ray free- electron laser (XFEL) beam and provide the best perfor- mance parameters as Fresnel zone plates for nanofocusing of XFEL pulses (David et al., 2011), diffracting crystals for XFEL self-seeding (Amann et al., 2012; Stoupin et al., 2013) and XFEL beam multiplexing (Stoupin et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2014). Theoretical studies (e.g. Medvedev et al., 2013) demonstrate that the present and future targets for instanta- neous power densities are still below the radiation damage threshold in diamond. High average power density diamond resilience tests are currently in progress at the Advanced Photon Source (K.-J. Kim & Y. V. Shvyd’ko, private commu- nication). Thus, the studies conducted so far demonstrate that diamond is an indispensable material for critical applications in X-ray optics for the present and the future light source facilities. A unique combination of exceptional intrinsic material properties such as high radiation hardness, record high thermal conductivity, small thermal expansion coefﬁcient and uniformity of refractive index make single-crystal diamond a material of choice for wavefront-preserving refracting optics in the critical high peak and high average power density applications. Several groups have reported successful fabrication and testing of diamond refractive lenses for focusing X-rays in one dimension (No¨hammer et al., 2003; Isakovic et al., 2009; Alianelli et al., 2010). These structures produced by ion/plasma etching have limited lateral apertures 100 mm, which is insufﬁcient to accommodate the typical size of the high-brightness X-ray beams. Single-crystal one-dimensional diamond CRLs fabricated by laser micro- machining which allow a suitable lateral aperture (500 mm) have been recently demonstrated (Polikarpov et al., 2014). In this work, we report the results of fabrication and char- acterization of single-crystal diamond refractive lenses of which the surfaces are paraboloids of revolution as in many currently used X-ray lenses (Lengeler et al., 1998, 1999). It has been shown that such lenses are free of aberrations and focus X-rays in two directions (Lengeler et al., 1999). Femtosecond laser micromachining was used to produce the paraboloids of a small local radius of curvature (105 mm) with a 450 mm diameter in single-crystal chemical vapour deposition (CVD) diamond plates available commercially. The fabricated lenses were tested using synchrotron radiation by re-imaging a photon source of a bending-magnet beamline (198 mm  78 mm) to a plane located at a distance of 54.5 m from the source. Nearly theoretical transmission over the central 230 mm area of the lens was demonstrated at a photon energy of 13.6 keV. These lenses were then stacked together to form a standard CRL with 3.36 m focal length and 450 mm aperture which was tested using undulator radiation at a photon energy of 11.85 keV. This CRL, placed at a distance of 62 m from an undulator, re-imaged the 652 mm  27 mm source into a spot of size 52.6 mm  21.4 mm. 2. Lens fabrication and metrology While the choice of diamond based on its physical properties is obvious, the practical implementation is challenging. Conventional laser cutting by standard nanosecond-pulse laser diamond cutters provides unsatisfactory results caused by thermal fatigue in diamond (Antipov et al., 2015). Unlike the conventional approach, femtosecond laser pulse duration is extremely short: the material is ablated and pulsed heating effects are minimized. The lenses presented here were manufactured from single-crystal CVD diamonds of various grades with thicknesses of about 500 mm. To machine a two- dimensional paraboloid, the femtosecond-laser beam was steered by a galvo mirror to ablate circle patterns gradually reducing the circle diameter with depth. The largest diameter on the diamond surface was about 450 mm. Identically, a matching paraboloid was micromachined on the opposite side of the diamond plate (Fig. 1). After micromachining, the diamonds were cleaned in a hot mineral acid bath containing an oxidizing agent. It was experimentally established that about 40 mm distance (waist) can be left between the paraboloids. The diamond would be punctured when a smaller paraboloid separation was attempted. Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) show the lens proﬁle image taken by an optical microscope. The parabolic shape can be seen through the transparent side of the diamond plate (Fig. 1a). Two parabolas are depicted in Fig. 1(b), an image taken from the side of the diamond plate. When the ﬁrst paraboloid was machined on the diamond surface, the total depth of the cut was measured. The second paraboloid was machined with the laser power scaled to maintain a separation of at least 40 mm. This is why the paraboloids had different radii of curvature (100 and 109 mm) as measured by white- light interferometry (WLI) using an optical proﬁlometer MicroXAM-1200 (Baryshev et al., 2012). WLI could not automatically reconstruct the three-dimensional proﬁle of the lenses due to poor reﬂectivity in the direction normal to the surface and high diamond transparency. By combining objectives of different magniﬁcation and enhanced contrast imaging, interference fringe diameters at different vertical positions of the focal plane, with the diamond surface set to zero as a reference, were recorded. All fringes (representing two-dimensional cross sections of a three-dimensional solid at every focal plane parallel to the surface) were nearly circular conﬁrming that the micromachined lenses had revolution research papers 164 S. Antipov et al.  Lens for focusing X-rays in two dimensions J. Synchrotron Rad. (2016). 23, 163–168

[PAGE 4] symmetry. Finally, curvature radii were measured via plotting a dependence of the fringe diameter on depth [symbols in Fig. 1(c)] and ﬁtting this dependence with a quadratic function [lines in Fig. 1(c)]. The goodness of determination (R 2) was 0.998. However, the vertical resolution of this measurement was limited due to poor functionality of the method/tool compromised by the high transparency of diamond and light refocusing by the lens itself. While the proﬁle of the lens (Fig. 1c) is globally parabolic, deviations from ideal shape are possible on the micrometre scale. The measured waist between the paraboloids in the tested lenses was 50 mm. A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the lens surface (Fig. 1d) showed a roughness of about 1 mm r.m.s. 3. Single lens X-ray source refocusing experiment The ﬁrst experiment was performed at the 1-BM optics testing beamline of the Advanced Photon Source. The experi- mental arrangement is shown in Fig. 2. A Si 111 double-crystal monochromator was tuned to a photon energy of 13.6 keV. To limit the wavefront distor- tion caused by the heat load on the monochromator ﬁrst crystal, the size of the incident white beam was set to 1 mm  1 mm using the upstream white-beam slit. The size of the monochromator exit beam was selected to be comparable with the total lens aperture using monochromator beam slits. The lenses were placed at a distance of 31.5 m from the source (bending magnet). A circular pinhole aperture with diameter 230 mm was placed in front of the lens. Imaging of the transmitted/refracted beam proﬁle was performed using an area detector (CCD) placed at 23 m downstream of the lens. A retractable solid-state pin diode detector (PIN) was used for relative measurements of the lens transmission (lens in/out of the beam). The area detector was equipped with 250 mm-thick LUAG:CE scintil- lator and an objective lens with 10 magniﬁcation. The ﬁeld of view for the area detector was 1.6 mm  1.4 mm with an effective pixel size of 0.65 mm. In the experiment the bending- magnet source size was reimaged to the far experimental station at the beamline while the lens was placed in the near station. The nominal demagniﬁcation ratio was 0.73. The bending-magnet source size was 198 (4) mm  78 (1) mm full width at half-maximum (FWHM). These values were taken as equal to the corresponding electron beam sizes of the bending-magnet source which were extracted from the log of synchrotron parameters. A few different diamond lenses were characterized. These samples were made from several different single-crystal CVD diamond grades. Diamond grades differ in the growth para- meters, distinguished mainly by the nitrogen content. We used mechanical grade single-crystal (1 p.p.m. of nitrogen concentration), optical grade (<200 p.p.b.) and electronic grade (<1 p.p.b.). No substantial difference in performance parameters was found for lenses made of different single- crystal diamond grades. To arrive at the optimal refocusing geometry the photon energy of the monochromator was tuned to obtain a minimal vertical size of the image on the area detector located at a ﬁxed distance corresponding to the focal research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2016). 23, 163–168 S. Antipov et al.  Lens for focusing X-rays in two dimensions 165 Figure 2 Experimental setup at the 1-BM optics testing beamline of the Advanced Photon Source (see text for details). Figure 1 (a, b) Microscope images of the lens at various angles. (c) Proﬁle of the lens measured by an optical proﬁlometer and parabolic ﬁt with radii of curvature. (d) Scanning electron micrograph of the lens surface showing roughness of the order of 1 mm.

[PAGE 5] distance f = 13.3 m. The optimal photon energy was found to be 13.6 keV. The equation for the focal distance of the lens f = R/[2(E)] allows us to evaluate the effective radius of curvature R since the refractive decrement (E) is a tabulated value. The effective radius of curvature was found to be R = 105 mm, which is in good agreement with the optical proﬁlometry results (Fig. 1c). In this optimal condition we measured the source image size by ﬁtting a two-dimensional Gaussian distribution to the intensity distribution in the imaging plane and transmission of the lens using the integrating detector. In order to compare experimental results with theory, the measured transmission value T = 0.973 was renormalized by the fraction of the signal forming the Gaussian portion of the image. The obtained effective transmission Teff was 0.87. The transverse distribu- tion of the beam obtained with the area detector and the Gaussian ﬁt projections are shown in Fig. 3. The measured and theoretical performance parameters are summarized in Table 1. A relevant theoretical model describing transmission through the lens of material with refractive index n = 1    i =ð4Þ (here  is the linear coefﬁcient of attenuation and  is the radiation wavelength) takes into account the interface roughness, . The effective transmission is given by (Lengeler et al., 1999) T ¼ expðdÞ 2ap 1  expð2apÞ   : ð1Þ The attenuation factor ap is given by ap ¼ R2 0 2R 2 R þ 2Q2 02   ; ð2Þ where Q0 = 2d= is the momentum transfer for transmission through an air–lens interface at normal incidence. R is the lens radius of curvature and 2R0 is the geometric aperture of interest, for example, limiting aperture size. The distance between the lenses’ paraboloids is d. This equation allows us to evaluate the transmission of the lens taking into account the surface roughness,  = 1.0 mm, estimated from the SEM measurements. The obtained value is T = 0.89 which agrees with the effective measured transmis- sion Teff = 0.87. The gain of a refractive lens is deﬁned as the ratio of the intensity in the focal spot to the intensity behind a pinhole (2R0 = 230 mm) equal to the spot of the lens: g = Teff4R 2 0 =ðBvBhÞ (Lengeler et al., 1999). An ideal lens in the geometry shown in Fig. 2 should refocus the source to an image with sizes Bh = 145 mm and Bv = 57 mm, both FWHM. The obtained values are larger (183 mm  86 mm), which can be attributed to deviations of the lens proﬁle from the ideal shape. We observe broadened tails of beam projections (Fig. 3) and a difference in the measured and the theoretical gain similar to that reported earlier in a one-dimensional diamond lens (Polikarpov et al., 2014). The laser micromachining process featuring a step-by-step ablation of material possibly produces a modulated parabolic proﬁle that results in a broadened focal spot and reduced gain (Polikarpov et al., 2014). 4. Compound refractive lens testing at BIOCAT After single-lens measurements we assembled a CRL proto- type by stacking together three diamond lenses. The total device size length was 1.5 mm with the focal length of 3.36 m at 11.85 keV X-ray energy and a total aperture of 450 mm. The CRL was tested using undulator radiation at the Biophysics Collaborative Access Team at the APS (http://www.bio.ap- s.anl.gov/facilities.html). It was installed at 62 m from the source. A circular pinhole aperture with a diameter of 400 mm was placed in front of the CRL. An ideal CRL would refocus the nearly Gaussian undulator source of size 652 mm  27 mm to an image of size 37.3 mm  1.55 mm FWHM (Lengeler et al., 1998). The focused beam proﬁle measured by CCD at 3.55 m from the lens was 52.6 mm  21.4 mm (Fig. 4). This discrepancy comes from an individual lens shape deviation from an ideal paraboloid proﬁle and surface roughness combined with stacking error. This result gives an indirect measure of effects coming from the shape deviation. The horizontal size of the beam is signiﬁcantly larger than the vertical size and therefore is much less sensi- tive to CRL stacking misalignments. The transmission of the CRL was 74%. The focused beam deviates from the Gaussian due to imperfections of lens geometry, limited stacking precision and the surface rough- ness. However, the Gaussian portion of the beam is 71%. To calculate the gain of the lens we corrected the experimental transmission value to include only the Gaussian portion. The research papers 166 S. Antipov et al.  Lens for focusing X-rays in two dimensions J. Synchrotron Rad. (2016). 23, 163–168 Figure 3 Image of the 13.6 keV X-ray beam focused by a single lens. Beam projections onto the x and y axes (white solid lines) and Gaussian ﬁt (orange dashed lines). The refocused source size is 183 mm  86 mm (FWHM). Table 1 Single-lens performance parameters. E (keV) T, theory Gain, theory Teff, experiment Bh, measured Bv, measured Gain, experiment 13.6 0.89 5.71 0.87 183 mm 86 mm 2.83

[PAGE 6] effective transmission of the CRL was 0.53 and the corre- sponding gain was 53.5. The prototype of a two-dimensional diamond single-crystal CRL is demonstrated to be functional for refocusing of an undulator source onto secondary optical schemes with reasonably small non-Gaussian contributions. The analysis of the measured parameters indicates a straightforward approach to achieve improvement in perfor- mance (e.g. precise lens stacking and further optimization of micromachining procedures). 5. Conclusion In summary, a two-dimensional X-ray refractive lens was fabricated out of single-crystal diamond by femtosecond-laser micromachining and experimentally tested. Efﬁcient refocus- ing of a bending-magnet source to a nearly Gaussian beam proﬁle was demonstrated at a photon energy of 13.6 keV. Three such lenses with average radii of curvature of 105 mm were stacked together to form a compound refractive lens. This compound lens was tested with an undulator beam at 11.85 keV photon energy. The undulator source was focused into a spot with a size of 52.6 mm  21.4 mm. The measured gain of the CRL was 53.5 which renders it suitable for moderate focusing applications of high-power-density X-ray beams. Further improvements of the CRL performance are anticipated to be achieved by implementation of precise stacking schemes and reﬁnement of laser micromachining and surface polishing procedures. Diamond CRLs will become the main choice for X-ray focusing of primary beams at future light sources. Due to the outstanding thermal and radiation hardness properties of diamond these devices can withstand extremely high instantaneous ﬂux densities generated by XFELs as well as unprecedented average ﬂux densities of the next-generation light sources with high repetition rates. Acknowledgements We are indebted to K.-J. Kim, Yu. V. Shvyd’ko, C. Jacobsen and A. Sandy for helpful discussions on the topic of X-ray refractive optics. R. Woods and K. Lang are acknowledged for technical support. Euclid Techlabs LLC acknowledges support from DOE SBIR program grant No. DE-SC0013129. Use of the Center for Nanoscale Materials, an Ofﬁce of Science user facility, was supported by the US Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. Use of the Advanced Photon Source was supported by the US Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. JEB acknowl- edges the support of the Act 220 of the Russian Government (Agreement No. 14.B25.31.0021 with the host organization IAP RAS). BioCAT acknowledges support by grant 9 P41 GM103622 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health. References Alianelli, L., Sawhney, K. J. S., Malik, A., Fox, O. J. L., May, P. W., Stevens, R., Loader, I. M. & Wilson, M. C. (2010). J. Appl. Phys. 108, 123107. Amann, J., Berg, W., Blank, V., Decker, F. J., Ding, Y., Emma, P., Feng, Y., Frisch, J., Fritz, D., Hastings, J., Huang, Z., Krzywinski, J., Lindberg, R., Loos, H., Lutman, A., Nuhn, H. D., Ratner, D., Rzepiela, J., Shu, D., Shvyd’ko, Y., Spampinati, S., Stoupin, S., Terentyev, S., Trakhtenberg, E., Walz, D., Welch, J., Wu, J., Zholents, A. & Zhu, D. (2012). Nat. Photon. 6, 693–698. Antipov, S. P., Baryshev, S. V., Butler, J. E., Jing, C., Kanareykin, A. D., Schoessow, P., Conde, M., Gai, W., Power, J. G. & Stoupin, S. (2015). Diamond Relat. Mater. 54, 15–18. Baryshev, S. V., Zinovev, A. V., Tripa, C. E., Erck, R. A. & Veryovkin, I. V. (2012). Appl. Surf. Sci. 258, 6963–6968. Berman, L. E., Hastings, J. B., Peter Siddons, D., Koike, M., Stojanoff, V. & Hart, M. (1993). Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 329, 555–563. David, C., Gorelick, S., Rutishauser, S., Krzywinski, J., Vila- Comamala, J., Guzenko, V. A., Bunk, O., Fa¨rm, E., Ritala, M., research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2016). 23, 163–168 S. Antipov et al.  Lens for focusing X-rays in two dimensions 167 Figure 4 Left (lens out): image of the aperture-limited beam. Right (lens in): image of the 11.85 keV X-ray beam focused by the CRL. Beam projections on the x and y axes (white solid line) and Gaussian ﬁt (orange dashed line). The focused beam size is 52.6 mm  21.4 mm.