[PAGE 1] research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2022). 29, 629–643 https://doi.org/10.1107/S1600577522001795 629 Received 23 November 2021 Accepted 16 February 2022 Edited by M. Yabashi, RIKEN SPring-8 Center, Japan ‡ Now at: Palm Scientific, Naperville, IL 60565, USA. Keywords: X-ray lenses; compound refractive lenses; diamond. Polished diamond X-ray lenses Rafael Celestre,a Sergey Antipov,b‡ Edgar Gomez,b Thomas Zinn,a Raymond Barretta and Thomas Rotha* aESRF – The European Synchrotron, 71 Avenue des Martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, France, and bEuclid Techlabs, 365 Remington Blvd, Bolingbrook, IL 60440, USA. *Correspondence e-mail: troth@esrf.fr High-quality bi-concave 2D focusing diamond X-ray lenses of apex-radius R = 100 mm produced via laser-ablation and improved via mechanical polishing are presented here. Both for polished and unpolished individual lenses and for stacks of ten lenses, the remaining ﬁgure errors determined using X-ray speckle tracking are shown and these results are compared with those of commercial R = 50 mm beryllium lenses that have similar focusing strength and physical aperture. For two stacks of ten diamond lenses (polished and unpolished) and a stack of eleven beryllium lenses, this paper presents measured 2D beam proﬁles out of focus and wire scans to obtain the beam size in the focal plane. These results are complemented with small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measure- ments of a polished and an unpolished diamond lens. Again, this is compared with the SAXS of a beryllium lens. The polished X-ray lenses show similar ﬁgure errors to commercially available beryllium lenses. While the beam size in the focal plane is comparable to that of the beryllium lenses, the SAXS signal of the polished diamond lenses is considerably lower. 1. Introduction Diamond is an excellent material for X-ray optics (Shvyd’ko et al., 2017) as it can withstand high heat loads due to its unri- valled thermal conductivity, absorbs little due to its low atomic number (Z = 6), can be obtained in pure and crystalline form with reasonable quality, and, as a refractive element such as a focusing lens, offers a refraction-to-absorption ratio / (Serebrennikov et al., 2016) higher than all typical lens mate- rials except for Be. Since the advent of X-ray focusing lenses (Tomie, 1997; Snigirev et al., 1996), signiﬁcant effort has been put into the fabrication of diamond X-ray lenses. Due to the difﬁculty of machining diamond with conventional tools, initial trials deposited CVD diamond into moulds produced in silicon via semiconductor lithography techniques (Snigirev et al., 2002) or used direct etching of CVD diamond wafers (No¨hammer et al., 2003a,b). These methods led to planar 1D focusing diamond lenses of reduced sagittal aperture (110 mm) due to the difﬁculties in producing deep structures using these planar technologies. Despite later improvements in the processing (Isakovic et al., 2009; Alianelli et al., 2010), lenses produced by these methods continue to display signif- icant tilt of their side walls, i.e. they are not perpendicular to the wafer surface. Nanofocusing with planar diamond lenses was ﬁnally demonstrated (Malik et al., 2013; Fox et al., 2014; Lyubomirskiy et al., 2019); however, the physical sagittal aperture of these nanofocusing lenses is still below 100 mm, and 2D focusing requires stacking of two 1D planar structures with consequent losses in transmission. Thicker 1D focusing structures were obtained by laser cutting of diamond plates (Polikarpov et al., 2016; Kononenko et al., 2016), with a big ISSN 1600-5775 Published under a CC BY 4.0 licence

[PAGE 2] challenge being again the verticality of the lens walls, reported to be 1.7 over a cutting depth of 0.6 mm. More recently, with the emergence of pico- and femto- second pulsed lasers, fabrication of larger structures via laser ablation became viable (Terentyev et al., 2015, 2017; Antipov et al., 2016). Ablation allows the fabrication of 1D or 2D focusing lenses into bulk diamond. Since the as-fabricated surface is rough [r.m.s. roughness on the order of 1 mm (Terentyev et al., 2015; JJ-X-ray, 2021)], the focusing proper- ties of these lenses are worse than comparable commercial Be lenses (Lengeler, 2012; Lengeler & Lengeler, 2021). A post- processing step to improve the surface roughness is thus required. Different methods have been employed: mechanical polishing (Antipov et al., 2018) and polishing via wet or dry etches (JJ-X-ray, 2021). Polishing using a focused ion beam or excimer laser has also been proposed (Polikarpov et al., 2016). Focused ion beam produced diamond lenses have been shown to produce very smooth lens surfaces and lead to excellent focusing. However, in practice, slow fabrication speeds limit the application of such technologies to the production of few lenses of very small aperture (Medvedskaya et al., 2020). Similar sized lenses, used in the visible range and with larger radii, can also be produced via a chemical reﬂow method (Zhu et al., 2017). We manufactured and characterized bi-concave 2D focusing diamond X-ray lenses produced, as individual elements, via laser ablation and subsequent mechanical polishing. The performance of these lenses is comparable to that of commercial Be lenses, which are regarded as the standard due to their widespread use and continuous devel- opment dating back to 2002 (Schroer et al., 2002). The lenses were conditioned in  12 mm frames, which conveniently makes them compatible with existing hardware (e.g. pin-holes, spacers, lens cases, v-blocks and transfocators). 2. Lens fabrication 2.1. Ablation process Ultrafast (femtosecond) laser ablation of materials has attracted signiﬁcant interest in recent years due to its promise for high machining accuracy and exceptional quality of the material processing. These appealing properties originate from laser pulse durations which are signiﬁcantly shorter than the thermal diffusion time at the scale of the beam spot size, thus offering reduced thermal damage and efﬁcient laser pulse utilization (Cheng et al., 2013; Sugioka & Cheng, 2014). Ultrafast laser ablation opened new opportunities for micro- machining materials like diamond which have a limited pool of processing technologies due to their physical properties. The diamond X-ray lenses characterized in this paper are produced by the femtosecond laser micro-machining (Osel- lame et al., 2012). Amongst the possible focusing shapes (Sanchez del Rio & Alianelli, 2012), 2D-focusing X-ray lenses most commonly assume a bi-concave paraboloid geometry (Lengeler et al., 1999). When producing such a shape via laser ablation, we decompose this proﬁle into circular layers with diameters that decrease parabolically with depth. In order to remove a circular layer, the laser beam is steered by motorized mirrors covering a circular area uniformly. To achieve the required accuracy of the shape a large set of parameters has to be optimized: the beam focus size and convergence as well as the laser ﬂux and pulse duration. We utilize a green 515 nm laser with a 200 fs pulse duration and average power of few hundred milliwatts depending on the focusing conﬁguration. The unavoidable motion errors, triggering jitter and re-deposition of the ablated material result in ﬁgure errors, that is, devia- tions of the resultant proﬁle from the design geometry. The lack of in situ metrology makes it virtually impossible to iteratively eliminate correlated errors by adjusting the abla- tion recipe. 2.2. Raw material The two main techniques for producing synthetic diamonds are high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT) growth and chemical vapour deposition (CVD). HPHT diamonds present a better crystalline structure; however, CVD diamonds can be produced in larger sizes and are less expensive (Shvyd’ko et al., 2017). Both types of synthetic diamond come in various grades, which differ in growth parameters and in spurious nitrogen content. The lenses used in this study were structured in low dislocation density HPHT (100)-oriented diamond plates. Fig. 1 compares the white-beam topography for an HPHT and a CVD diamond. Due to lower dislocation densities in HPHT diamond compared with CVD diamond, Fig. 1(a) is more homogeneous than Fig. 1(b). For the purposes of laser- cutting, we have not observed any substantial difference using several grades of diamonds, i.e. polycrystalline and single- crystalline CVD and HPHT with different nitrogen concen- tration. The femtosecond-laser cutting process does not signiﬁcantly increase the dislocation density around the lens structures as shown in Fig. 1(c). We have observed, however, a difference in the polishing process removal rate and unifor- mity depending on the diamond grade. In terms of X-ray transport and beam focusing, one expects that a diamond with a higher degree of crystallinity will produce less small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). However more important to the performance of a diamond lens are its ﬁgure error and surface roughness. The choice of diamond grade has a signiﬁcant impact on the total cost of the lens and, if a lower grade diamond is acceptable for certain applications, the cost of the diamond lenses can be reduced. Now that the quality of diamond lenses presented here is substantially improved, it is possible and desirable to perform a dedicated study on the inﬂuence of the raw material for future diamond lens production. 2.3. Post-polishing Depending on ablation parameters, the as-cut surface roughness of the diamond lens is 300–500 nm Sa (ISO 25178, which deﬁnes a surface extension of Ra, arithmetical mean research papers 630 Rafael Celestre et al.  Polished diamond X-ray lenses J. Synchrotron Rad. (2022). 29, 629–643

[PAGE 3] deviation of heights from the assessed proﬁle – ISO 4287), obtained by confocal microscopy at 50 magniﬁcation. To reduce these values we developed a post-ablation chemical– mechanical polishing procedure for the diamond lenses. In this process, a conformal needle (polishing bit) is lowered into the diamond lens along with 0.1 mm diamond slurry and spun inside for several hours. Fig. 2 shows the basic setup and typical polishing results. A high-speed, high-accuracy spindle is used to spin the polishing bit inside the lens. Note that, due to the small size of the lens and the polishing bit, a microscope is used to align the polishing bit with the lens. The polishing process is a hybrid of chemical etching and free abrasive polishing. Multiple para- meters must be optimized: polishing bit material, slurry solvent and grit size, contact pressure, and rotational speed. Since the surface of the lens is curved (Fig. 2, middle), there is an uneven force perpendicular to the surface when a down- ward pressure is applied. This leads to uneven removal of material. To compensate this effect we introduce periodic pressure applied sideways. The polishing process has been ﬁne-tuned and is able to maintain a quasi-uniform removal rate along the complete surface of the lens. The lens surface is polished to optical transparency with local micro-roughness of about 20 nm Sa. The ﬁnal result is presented in Fig. 3, which was captured through the polished and transparent side wall of the diamond plates. 2.4. Packaging In general, X-ray lenses are stacked together to obtain short focal lengths. These compound refractive lenses (CRLs), as those stacks are called, can be composed of several dozen individual lenses. An important factor to be considered for adopting CRLs in synchrotron beamlines is how well the lenses can be aligned with respect to each other as misalign- ments between the elements of a CRL will degrade the lens performance (Andrejczuk et al., 2010; Celestre et al., 2020b). A common solution applied to individually produced 2D X-ray research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2022). 29, 629–643 Rafael Celestre et al.  Polished diamond X-ray lenses 631 Figure 2 Photograph and sketch of the polishing process (left and middle). On the right, an SEM image shows the diamond lens surface at an interface between a polished and intentionally unpolished region. Figure 1 X-ray white beam topography images. (a) HPHT diamond, (b) single-crystal CVD diamond and (c) CVD diamond plate with lenses cut in it. Diamonds in this image are 3 mm  3 mm  0.5 mm in size. Figure 3 Microscope images of an unpolished (left) and a polished (right) lens. The images are taken through the polished side wall of the diamond plate. Both lenses have a physical aperture of Aphys ’ 440 mm.

[PAGE 4] lenses is to house them in 12 mm-diameter precision- machined disks, where the lenses should be centred within 1 mm or 2 mm. This is the case, for example, with commercial Be, Al and Ni embossed lenses. We fabricate our support disks from copper alloy (bronze) with diameters within a 2–3 mm tolerance. Prior to laser ablation, the diamond plate in the form of a truncated cone is pressed carefully into the disk to avoid any tilt. Once the diamond is properly set, the lens proﬁle can be micromachined in the centre of the disk. To ensure that both the back- and front-paraboloidal sections overlap, we mount the lens in a small stationary v-block shown in Fig. 4(a). We also use ﬁdu- cial markings on the coin to align them to the v-block to determine the lens orientation during ablation, see Fig. 4(b). By packing our diamond lens in the same form factor as the industry-standard they can be readily integrated in beamlines using existing hardware (e.g. pin-holes, spacers, lens cases, v-blocks and transfocators) coexisting harmoniously with already acquired lenses. Fig. 4(c) shows lens stacks in a commercial lens holder. 2.5. Visible-light metrology Despite not being implemented as an in situ measurement, we use scanning confocal laser microscopy for ﬁne-tuning the ablation and post-polishing processes. This preliminary inspection tool is able to quickly provide information regarding the geometric aperture, refracting surface penetra- tion depth, parabolic shape and radius of curvature of indi- vidual refracting surfaces as shown in Fig. 5(a). Removing the best paraboloid ﬁt from the metrology data, we are able to determine the ﬁgure errors as displayed in Figs. 5(b) and 5(c), showing we achieve sub-micrometre r.m.s. ﬁgure errors for the laser-machined paraboloid. One of the limitations of this technique is the accurate determination of the mutual alignment of the measurements from the front and back surfaces in a bi-concave lens. Also, though measuring as- ablated surfaces is relative straightforward due to the elevated roughness and light scattering, polished lenses with their smooth surfaces and transparency are very difﬁcult to measure using visible light confocal microscopy. A workaround to this inconvenience is applying a very thin conformal coating to reduce the transparency to visible light and make the laser scanning measurement possible. research papers 632 Rafael Celestre et al.  Polished diamond X-ray lenses J. Synchrotron Rad. (2022). 29, 629–643 Figure 4 Packaging of diamond lens: (a) mini v-block for lens ablation, (b) lens support disk containing a diamond with an ablated lens in the middle and ﬁducial markings indicating azimuthal orientation during the ablation process, (c) lens stacking for an experiment in a commercial lens holder. Lenses are housed in 12 mm-diameter bronze disks. Figure 5 Laser scanning confocal microscopy of an unpolished diamond lens: (top) 3D reconstruction of front refractive surface, (bottom) residual proﬁle after extraction of a paraboloid ﬁt.

[PAGE 5] 3. Lenses and lens stacks measured in this work In this paper, we show experimental results obtained using individual lenses of three different types as well as results of three different lens stacks. The three types of individual lenses are (i) unpolished R = 100 mm diamond lenses; (ii) polished R = 100 mm diamond lenses; and (iii) commercial R = 50 mm Be lenses produced by RXOptics (Lengeler & Lengeler, 2021), where R represents the apex radius of curvature of the sagittal and meridional parabolic sections. The three different lens stacks are: (A) a stack of N = 10 of the unpolished R = 100 mm diamond lenses, (B) a stack of N = 10 of the polished R = 100 mm diamond lenses, and (C) a stack of N = 11 of the commercial R = 50 mm Be lenses. The diamond lenses have a crystal thickness LC* of roughly 500 mm (the lens thickness varied between 471 mm and 515 mm) and a distance between the apices of the paraboloidal sections (t or web thickness) of about 20 mm. The Be lenses are pressed into LBe = 1 mm- thick Be discs and have an apex width of about 30 mm. Comparing R = 100 mm diamond lenses with R = 50 mm Be lenses is reasonable: ﬁrst, the focusing strength of a single lens can be characterized by its focal length f = R/(2N) with N = 1 for a single lens, R the lens radius and  the refractive index decrement of the element used. At photon energies between 5 keVand 50 keV, the ratio C*/Be varies slightly around 2.14, see Appendix A. This makes an R = 100 mm diamond lens about equivalent to an R = 50 mm Be lens. Secondly, as the physical aperture of a lens is given as Aphys = 2[(L  t)R]1/2, and in our case we have LBeRBe ’ LC*RC*, we obtain also very similar physical apertures of Aphys ’ 440 mm. Our two diamond lens stacks contain N = 10 individual lenses (unpolished or polished). We can ﬁne-tune the number NBe of Be lenses to get the best equivalent Be lens stack as follows, NBe ¼ NC C Be RBe RC ’ 10:7: ð1Þ We thus use N = 11 lenses for the Be lens stack. 4. At-wavelength metrology via X-ray speckle tracking Although helpful in order to study surface roughness and measure the depth and aperture of the machined lens, the initial inspection using visible-light metrology after lens production suffers from limitations: it only probes one side of a bi-concave lens at a time and is insensitive to sub-surface defects; it also does not measure the alignment and mutual tilt of the front- and back-focusing surfaces. For the polished lenses, little signal returns from the steeper parts of the parabolic surfaces. To overcome those drawbacks and recover ﬁgure errors in projection approximation, we use X-ray (near- ﬁeld) speckle vector tracking (XSVT) (Berujon et al., 2020b) which is an at-wavelength metrology technique. In the differential metrology mode of XSVT, the experi- ment consists of a monochromatic beam with sufﬁcient lateral coherence illuminating a random static modulator and projecting the speckle pattern generated by it onto a 2D imaging detector. A reference dataset is taken by transversely shifting the random modulator across the beam and regis- tering N images. A lens (-stack) is then introduced in the beam downstream of the speckle-modulator at a distance d from the detector. A second dataset is taken by once again scanning the random modulator across the beam and registering N images at the exact positions where the reference dataset was taken. By comparing both datasets, the lateral displacement map x(x, y), y(x, y) of the speckle pattern at the detector plane is calculated. With the knowledge of the distance d, the deﬂec- tion angle (x, y) ’ (x, y)/d is retrieved. This deﬂection angle is related to the beam phase gradient r by the wave- number k. By numerical integration of the phase gradients obtained experimentally, the beam phase (x, y) can be calculated. The projected thickness of the probe is calculated as z(x, y) = (x, y)/k. The ﬁgure errors in the projection approximation are recovered by removing a paraboloid of revolution (2D focusing). The XSVT technique is described in more detail in Section 2.2.3 in the work by Berujon et al. (2020b) and Section 3.1.1 in the work by Berujon et al. (2020a). Our XSVT experiments were performed at the ESRF-EBS beamline BM05 (Ziegler, 2004) using a monochromatic beam, Si(111) double-crystal monochromator, at 17 keV for single- lens metrology (Section 4.1) and 30 keV for lens stack measurements (Section 4.2). The change in energy for the stack measurement is to keep d sufﬁciently large to avoid the speckle grains collapsing into each other, causing the tracking algorithm to fail. The measurements at lower energies used stacked cellulose acetate membrane ﬁlters with a pore size of 1.2 mm as the speckle generator, whereas the measurements at 30 keV used stacked sheets of 1200 grit silicon carbide abrasive paper. The random modulators were mounted on piezoelectric nano-positioners to ensure high position repeatability between both datasets. The distance d between probe and detector was kept at 800 mm for the 17 keV measurements and 500 mm for the stacked lenses metrology. The detector was a pco.edge sCMOS sensor coupled to a 10 microscope objective imaging a 17 mm-thick GGG:Eu scin- tillator. The effective pixel size is 0.635 mm. The lateral reso- lution has been evaluated at 17 keV only, where it is better than 1.5 mm. This section presents the XSVT results of unpolished and polished X-ray lenses and compares their shape errors to those of the equivalent R = 50 mm Be lenses of similar geometric aperture. A selection of these lenses can then be used to form three stacks of similar focusing strength that are also measured and presented: 10  unpolished, 10  polished diamond and 11  Be lenses. 4.1. Individual lens measurements The metrology of individual lenses allows quantiﬁcation of the ﬁgure errors of the lenses after the laser ablation machining process and can help to ﬁne-tune this process. Furthermore, it can investigate the effect of post-polishing on the ﬁgure errors of the X-ray lenses. research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2022). 29, 629–643 Rafael Celestre et al.  Polished diamond X-ray lenses 633

[PAGE 6] Fig. 6 shows representative examples of lens radiographs and ﬁgure errors for the three lens types used in this work. The presence of concentric circle-like- and bent-radial structures in the unpolished diamond lens radiography is evident – these features are also present in the accumulated ﬁgure errors for the same lens [cf. Figs. 6(a) and 6(b)]. These features originate from the rough surface after the ablation process and are completely removed by polishing as shown in Figs. 6(c) and 6(d). The post-polishing, however, introduces rotational symmetric ﬁgure errors to the lens, without signiﬁcant change to the ﬁgure error r.m.s. value () over the useful aperture. The Be lens radiograph is very homogeneous. The r.m.s. ﬁgure error of the Be lens is of a similar size to that of both diamond lenses. However, the ﬁgure errors of the Be lens can be well described by only lower-order Zernike polynomials, i.e. they have a smoother long-range order, plus a high- frequency short-range noise, possibly due to the Be micro- structure. The observations based on Fig. 6 are representative of all measured unpolished and polished diamond and Be lenses. Fig. 7 summarizes some key parameters (lens radius, aperture, r.m.s. ﬁgure error and optical path difference) for 14 unpol- ished and 25 polished diamond lenses comparing them against the metrology of 24 equivalent Be lenses. We can see that polishing the diamond lenses has the effect of slightly increasing the radius of curvature R. The unpolished lenses have a mean radius of curvature of R = 95.4 0.6 mm, whereas for the post-processed lenses R = 97 1 mm, Fig. 7(a). As a reference, for the Be lenses R = 48.7 0.3 mm [cf. Fig. 7(b)]. The target radii are 100 mm for C* and 50 mm for Be lenses. The geometric aperture of the diamond lenses is system- atically smaller than those of the equivalent Be lenses as shown in Fig. 7(c). The probable reasons for this difference are threefold: (i) mismatch between the designed and executed penetration depth of the parabolic section (refracting surface), research papers 634 Rafael Celestre et al.  Polished diamond X-ray lenses J. Synchrotron Rad. (2022). 29, 629–643 Figure 6 Single-lens radiograph and ﬁgure error for each investigated lens type: unpolished R = 100 mm C* lens (top,), polished C* lens (middle) and R = 50 mm Be lens (bottom). Radiographs were taken 800 mm downstream of the sample, enhancing edge effects in phase-contrast imaging (dark rings delimiting the lens geometric aperture). Figure 7 Dispersion plots of the lenses main ﬁgures of merit obtained with XSVT metrology of individual lenses. The OPD is calculated for E = 10 keV.