[PAGE 1] research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2020). 27, 305–318 https://doi.org/10.1107/S1600577519017235 305 Received 15 November 2019 Accepted 25 December 2019 Edited by A. Momose, Tohoku University, Japan Keywords: compound refractive lenses; CRLs; X-ray optics; physical optics; wavefront propagation; simulation; SRW. Modelling phase imperfections in compound refractive lenses Rafael Celestre,* Sebastien Berujon, Thomas Roth, Manuel Sanchez del Rio and Raymond Barrett ESRF – The European Synchrotron, 71 Avenue des Martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, France. *Correspondence e-mail: rafael.celestre@esrf.eu A framework based on physical optics for simulating the effect of imperfect compound refractive lenses (CRLs) upon an X-ray beam is described, taking into account measured phase errors obtained from at-wavelength metrology. A CRL stack is modelled, with increasing complexity, as a single thin phase element, then as a more realistic compound element including absorption and thickness effects, and ﬁnally adding realistic optical imperfections to the CRL. Coherent and partially coherent simulations using Synchrotron Radiation Workshop (SRW) are used to evaluate the different models, the effects of the phase errors and to check the validity of the design equations and suitability of the ﬁgures of merit. 1. Introduction The use of refractive optics for the focusing of X-rays dates back to the mid-1990s (Tomie, 1994; Snigirev et al., 1996) which is relatively recent when compared with the use of diffractive (early 1930s) and reﬂective optics (late 1940s). Although a recent development, X-ray lenses are used at most high- energy synchrotron facilities1 and X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs) either for beam conditioning, ﬁnal focusing of the X-rays into the sample or for imaging. The recent develop- ment and establishment of fourth-generation synchrotron light sources – as upgrades of existing machines or the construction of new facilities – and the emergence of the XFEL poses a new challenge for X-ray optics: wavefront preservation, as at modern sources the X-ray beam quality at the sample is primarily limited by the optical quality (Schroer & Falkenberg, 2014; Yabashi et al., 2014). Under certain conditions, X-ray lenses are well adapted for situations where minimizing wavefront distortions is impor- tant (Roth et al., 2017; Seiboth et al., 2017; Kolodziej et al., 2018). To understand their impact on the optical design of complete beamlines, it is necessary to be able to simulate them realistically. The basic implementation of X-ray lenses is already available on the two most widespread beamline simulation tools: SHADOW (Sanchez del Rio et al., 2011) and SRW (Chubar & Elleaume, 1998). Both implementations, although based on different schemes, i.e. ray tracing (Alianelli et al., 2007) and wave optics (Baltser et al., 2011), respectively, are based on an ideal model combining refraction and absorption for the stacked lenses. Since then, much has been done in terms of reﬁning the modelling of ideal X-ray lenses ISSN 1600-5775 1 Just before the ESRF shut down for the installation of the new ESRF-EBS storage ring, in December 2018, approximately 40% of the existing beamlines used X-ray lenses in their optical setup.

[PAGE 2] (Umbach et al., 2008; Sanchez del Rio & Alianelli, 2012; Osterhoff et al., 2013; Simons et al., 2017; Pedersen et al., 2018) and, to a certain extent, the modelling of optical imperfections (Pantell et al., 2001; Andrejczuk et al., 2010; Gasilov et al., 2017; Osterhoff et al., 2017). With the exception of the work of Roth et al. (2014), investigating the inner structure of X-ray lenses, the present models consider only lens shape and departure from a perfect parabolic shape to either test the limits of ﬁgure errors and fabrication defects or to improve lens shape and focusing quality. These, however, do not include the data from real lenses metrology, as is routinely done for X-ray mirrors simulations (Sanchez del Rio et al., 2016). Furthermore, it is important to have simulation tools to allow for the accurate implementation of synchrotron or XFEL light sources, allowing the compound refractive lenses (CRLs) to be included in a complete beamline conﬁguration in combination with other optical elements. This is possible with both SHADOW and SRW. In this work, we propose a framework for simulating CRLs taking into account their thickness, absorption and individual lens phase errors measured with at-wavelength metrology. Such phase errors can arise from material inhomogeneities (voids, impurities) and/or ﬁgure errors from the lens-forming process. Our approach is fully compatible with SRW as the X-ray optics community interest shifts to the study of wave- front preservation and tolerancing in low-emittance synchro- tron or XFEL beamlines. However, the extension and application of this methodology to ray-tracing (Rebufﬁ& Sanchez del Rio, 2016) and hybrid methods (Shi et al., 2014) is possible. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces basic design equations necessary for modelling X-ray lenses and ﬁgures of merit to evaluate the optical performance of the CRL. With increasing complexity, Section 3 introduces the complex transmission element and from it derives the repre- sentation of the CRL and their phase errors used for accurate simulations of real imperfections. Section 4 presents the simulations in two groups: coherent and partially coherent simulations. This is where the evaluation of the different models, the effects of the lens imperfections and checking the validity of the design equations and suitability of the ﬁgures of merit is done. Finally, the results are discussed and the main conclusions are drawn. 2. Compound refractive lenses In this section, we recall some important design equations in Section 2.1 and ﬁgures of merit used when assessing the X-ray focusing quality in Section 2.2. 2.1. CRL anatomy X-ray lenses may have different surface shape: in initial experiments (Snigirev et al., 1996) a cylindrical surface was used, which was soon replaced by a parabolic shape that almost completely removes geometrical aberrations (Lengeler et al., 1999). Parabolic lenses are the most used X-ray lenses for CRLs as they can focus in one dimension (1D; cylinder with parabolic section) or in two dimensions (2D; paraboloid of revolution). It is worth noting, however, that, although less usual, X-ray lenses can assume other shapes: an elliptical proﬁle when focusing collimated beams (Evans-Lutterodt et al., 2003) or a Cartesian oval for point-to-point focusing (Sanchez del Rio & Alianelli, 2012). However, parabolic shapes always present a very good approximation to geometric focusing and reduce the geometrical aberrations to levels that are smaller than the contributions from the fabri- cation errors and diffraction effects. Very often X-ray lenses are deﬁned by a small set of parameters as shown in Fig. 1(a). These are: (i) material; (ii) apex radius of curvature (Rx, Ry); (iii) lens thickness (L) or geometrical aperture (A), and (iv) distance between the apices of the parabolas (twall). We begin by deﬁning the optical power F = f 1 of a single refracting surface of radius R, where f is its focal length. The index of refraction for the X-ray regime can be expressed as a complex number: n = 1   + i, with  being the refraction index decrement and  the absorption index, both strongly dependent on energy and material. With the X-ray beam moving along the positive z-direction in Fig. 1, the refracting power of the vacuum/lens interface is given by Fx;y  1 fx;y ¼ n2  n1 Rx;y ¼  Rx;y : ð1Þ research papers 306 Rafael Celestre et al.  Simulation of real CRL imperfections J. Synchrotron Rad. (2020). 27, 305–318 Figure 1 (a) Sagittal cut of an X-ray lens showing its main geometrical parameters. This concave lens focuses X-rays in the y-direction if n1 > n2. (b) N- stacked lenses. A single X-ray lens refracts very weakly. To overcome this drawback – pointed out as early as the late 1940s (Kirkpatrick & Baez, 1948) – lenses are usually stacked, hence ‘compound’ in compound refractive lenses.

[PAGE 3] Here we will consider only the real part of the indices of refraction as this governs the focusing effect of the lenses. As illustrated by Fig. 1(a), lenses are typically formed by two refracting surfaces of nominally the same radii. From paraxial optics, the total optical power of refracting surfaces in intimate contact is the sum of their powers. The same is valid for the cases where the distance between them can be ignored. Typical materials used for X-ray lenses have 107    103 for their usual application energies (Serebrennikov et al., 2016). To overcome the weak refraction of a single element, several X-ray lenses are stacked (Tomie, 1994; Snigirev et al., 1996). Still, under the assumption of thin elements, we have fthin CRL ¼ Rx;y 2N ; ð2Þ where the 2N comes from stacking N lenslets with two refracting surfaces each, as shown in Fig. 1(b). A correction factor can be added to equation (2) in order to account for the thick-element nature of the CRL, as proposed by Kohn et al. (2003). The corrected focal length for a thick CRL is given by fCRL ¼ Rx;y 2N þ LCRL 6 : ð3Þ This focal distance is taken from the middle of the CRL and LCRL is the CRL longitudinal size, that is, the distance from the front surface of the ﬁrst optical element to the back surface of the last lens. Another important parameter for optical design is the lens geometrical aperture A, as it provides an upper bound for the numerical aperture of the system and, ultimately, to the theoretical optical resolving power. Assuming a parabolic proﬁle of the refracting surface, the lens geometrical aperture can be calculated as Ax;y ¼ 2 L  twall ð ÞRx;y  1=2; ð4Þ where L is the lenslet thickness and twall is the distance between the apices of the parabolas, commonly referred to as the web thickness. Due to absorption, the geometrical aperture deﬁned in equation (4) is greater than or equal to the effective lens aperture as indicated by Kohn (2017). There are several reported ways of deﬁning the effective lens aperture. Fig. 2 shows the transmitted intensity proﬁle of a CRL composed of ten 2D beryllium lenses with nominal radius Rx, y = 50 mm and circular geometric aperture A1 = 440 mm at different energies. Unlike visible optics, where the transmitted intensity proﬁle within the aperture closely follows that of the illumination, the transmitted proﬁle through a (stack of) X-ray lens(es) has strong absorption towards the edge, which deﬁnes the CRL as an apodized optical system. 2.2. CRL performance Here we present the reader with some other useful ﬁgures of merit commonly used for evaluating the performance of optical systems. 2.2.1. Diffraction-limited focal spot. Even an ideal and aberration-free ﬁnite optical element is not able to image a point source to a point-like image. Limiting the extent of the focusing element by deﬁning an aperture will induce diffrac- tion effects on the wavefront and these will limit the smallest reachable focus spot size. The normalized response of the optical system to this point-like source input is called the point-spread function (PSF). For a system with circular aper- ture and uniform amplitude across the exit pupil, the intensity of such a focused beam at the image plane is proportional to a squared ﬁrst-order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind (Airy pattern). The full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the central cone is given by d ¼ 1:22ð1  MÞ fCRL A ; ð5Þ where M is the magniﬁcation of the system, which goes to zero for a plane wave or a very distant source. Systems with nonuniform illumination at the pupil exit, in our case apodized systems approaching a Gaussian illumination (see Fig. 2), may present a different PSF shape depending on the truncation imposed by the aperture. A very weakly truncated focusing system (e.g. transmission curve for 6 keV in Fig. 2) will have a Gaussian-shaped focal spot as little to no cropping occurs and therefore diffraction effects can be neglected. Increasing the truncation of the beam enhances diffraction effects from the geometric aperture. A strongly truncated focusing system (e.g. transmission curve for 12 keV in Fig. 2) will have a PSF that resembles the diffraction pattern in the far-ﬁeld associated with the aperture of the system2 (Mahajan, 1982, 1986). 2.2.2. Tolerance conditions for aberrations. Introducing errors to the optical system will reduce the peak intensity in the PSF. The ratio between the peak intensities of the aber- rated- and non-aberrated PSF of a system with the same aperture and focal length is referred to as the Strehl ratio [cf. Section 9.1.3 of Born et al. (1999)]. The optical aberrations on the exit pupil of an optical system can be described by the aberration function (x,y), with the dimension of metres, research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2020). 27, 305–318 Rafael Celestre et al.  Simulation of real CRL imperfections 307 Figure 2 Intensity transmission proﬁle of a CRL composed of ten 2D beryllium lenses with nominal radius Rx, y = 50 mm, geometric aperture A1 = 440 mm and twall = 10 mm at different photon energies. The vertical dashed line represents the lens geometrical half-aperture. The calculations were performed using the Synchrotron Radiation Workshop computer code (Chubar & Elleaume, 1998). 2 The far-ﬁeld diffraction pattern of a circular aperture is a squared ﬁrst-order Bessel function proﬁle while a square aperture will produce a 2D sinc-squared pattern (Guasti & Heredia, 1993).

[PAGE 4] which represents any deviation in shape from an ideal proﬁle. For small aberration values, the Strehl ratio can be approxi- mated3 by Sratio a ¼ Iaberrated Iaberration free ’ 1  2   2 2; ð6Þ where  is the wavelength and  is the standard deviation of the aberration function (x,y). An important consequence of equation (6) is that the reduction in the peak intensity on the focal plane does not depend on the type of aberration nor the focal length of the optical system but on its standard deviation across the exit pupil of the optical system (Born et al., 1999). Alternative expressions to equation (6) are available in Section 8.3 of Mahajan (2011), namely Sratio b ’ 1  2   2 2 2 " #2 ; ð7Þ known as the Mare´chal expression, and Sratio c ’ exp  2   2 2 " # ; ð8Þ an empiric expression that ﬁts better numerical results (Wetherell, 1980). However, for strong aberrations, there is no simple analytic expression to describe the relation between the Strehl ratio and the standard deviation of the aberration function (x,y) (Kessler, 1981). It is possible to deﬁne an arbitrary minimum acceptable value to the Strehl ratio when evaluating an optical element quality (tolerancing). This value depends on the ﬁnal appli- cation and the desired performance. However, a value of Sratio  0.8 is commonly found throughout the literature as an indicator of a well corrected optical system.4 Inserting Sratio  0.8 into equation (6), one obtains jj  =14; ð9Þ which is known as the Mare´chal criterion for optical quality. Equations (7) and (8) give similar limits: /13.67 and /13.30, respectively. In order to apply equation (9) to the case of an X-ray lens, we use equation (13b) (from Section 3.1) with  = ð2=Þz = ð2=Þjj, where  is the standard deviation of the phase, and we replace the projected thickness z with the standard deviation of the projected ﬁgure error z, z  =14: ð10Þ Equation (10) gives an upper limit to the standard deviation of accumulated ﬁgure errors for X-ray lenses in order to comply with the Mare´chal criterion of tolerable wavefront aberra- tions, or, in other words, to sustain Sratio  0.8. For a more complete discussion on the aberrated PSF, Strehl ratio and tolerance conditions for primary aberrations, refer to Section 9 of Born et al. (1999) and Section 8 of Mahajan (2011). 2.3. Chromatic aberrations The optical properties of the X-ray lenses are strongly dependent on the wavelength as both  and  have an energy dependency. This causes chromatic aberrations and limitations on the optical performance of the CRL under an X-ray beam with ﬁnite bandwidth. The chromaticity of X-ray lenses can be used favourably for X-ray harmonic rejection from insertion devices and coarse X-ray spectrum ﬁltering (Vaughan et al., 2011; Polikarpov et al., 2014). 3. CRL: physical optics modelling In this section, we present the models for accurately repre- senting a realistic CRL following wave-optics representation (Goodman, 2017). We start by deﬁning a complex transmis- sion element and, with increasing complexity, we present the different models that are based on this complex transmission element concept. 3.1. The complex transmission element The amplitude transmission of radiation through matter can be expressed as a complex operator – Section 2 of Paganin (2006), Tðx; y; z; Þ ¼ exp 2i  Z C h ðx; y; z; Þ  iðx; y; z; Þ i ds  ; ð11Þ with z being along the beam direction, x and y are the trans- verse coordinates to z,  is the wavelength and R C is a path integral along ds. Favouring a more compact notation, we drop here the explicit energy dependency of the index of refraction. The z-dependence of  and  is abandoned in the projection approximation, which is often valid when modelling refractive optics.5 The integral in equation (11) reduces to Tðx; y; zÞ ¼ exp  2i  Z z 0  ðx; yÞ  iðx; yÞ  ds  ¼ exp  2i   ðx; yÞ  iðx; yÞ  z  ; TðzÞ ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ TBL p exp i ; ð12Þ where research papers 308 Rafael Celestre et al.  Simulation of real CRL imperfections J. Synchrotron Rad. (2020). 27, 305–318 3 Equations (6) to (8) were obtained using a fully coherent illumination of the optical system; however, deﬁning the Strehl ratio as the ratio between the peak intensities of the aberrated- and non-aberrated optical under study transcends the nature of the illumination. A more complete derivation of the Strehl ratio [equation (6)] can be found in Section 9.1.3 of Born et al. (1999). 4 This comes from historic reasons: both Rayleigh’s /4 criterion for spherical aberrations (1879) and the extended Mare´chal criterion for optical quality (1943) yield a Strehl ratio of 0.8 (Born et al., 1999). 5 Multi-slicing techniques are often used to deal with the cases where, for weak scatterers, n(x,y,z) 6¼ n(x,y,z + z). Here z is an incremental distance along the propagation direction. Chapters 2.2 and 2.7 of Paganin (2006) deal in more detail with the projection approximation and the multi-slicing technique, which was ﬁrst described in the context of the scattering of electrons by atoms and crystals (Cowley & Moodie, 1957).

[PAGE 5] TBL ¼ exp  4  z   ¼ exp z ð Þ; ð13aÞ  ¼  2  z: ð13bÞ The integration path ds is along the z direction. It is propor- tional to the projected thickness z, which in turn depends on the transverse coordinates: z  z(x,y). Equation (13a) shows the absorption experienced by the wavefront when passing through matter (Beer–Lambert law), and equation (13b) shows the phase-shift experienced by the wavefront. The coefﬁcient multiplying z in TBL is know as the linear attenuation coefﬁcient . The transmitted electric ﬁeld is obtained by multiplication of the input ﬁeld with the complex transmission operator in equation (12), that is, E2 = T½zðx; yÞ E1. 3.2. Ideal thin lens and single lens equivalent At any point inside the geometric aperture of a single bi- concave paraboloidal X-ray lens, the projected thickness z can be calculated as zðx; yÞ ¼ x2 Rx þ y2 Ry þ twall: ð14Þ Equation (14) can be substituted into equations (13a) and (13b) to retrieve the complex transmission element expression for an X-ray lens, Tsingle lensðzÞ  ¼ exp i 2   x2 Rx þ y2 Ry þ twall   exp i 2   x2 Rx þ y2 Ry    : ð15Þ The * symbol represents an arbitrary input electric ﬁeld. Equation (15), the single lens model, accounts for the absorption (ﬁrst exponential) and phase shift (second expo- nential ignoring the constant phase shift induced by twall). The complex transmission representing a CRL composed of N elements is, thus, represented by TCRLðzÞ  ¼ Tsingle lensðzÞ  N: ð16Þ The model represented by equation (16) will be referred to as the single lens equivalent. This model represents a lens stack by a single transmission element with equivalent focal distance and the projected thickness of all the N single lenses as shown in Fig. 3(a). 3.3. Multi-slicing representation of a CRL For a CRL composed of a very high number of lenslets, the single-lens equivalent approximation [equation (16)] may not be adequate to correctly represent such optical systems mainly due to the thick nature of the stack – shown by equation (3); and due to the progressive focusing inside the CRL (Schroer & Lengeler, 2005) – exaggerated in Fig. 1(b). For such cases, it is possible to adapt the multi-slicing (MS) techniques for the calculation of the transmission of a wavefront through a CRL. Unlike the methods described by Paganin (2006) and most recently by Li et al. (2017) and Munro (2019), where a single weakly scattering optical element is sliced into several slabs, it is sufﬁcient for most practical cases to break down a CRL into its lenses as shown in Fig. 3(b). This can be justiﬁed by the fact that, at their typical operation energy, the materials used for lens manufacturing have a very low  (Serebrennikov et al., 2016), rendering the individual lenslets a weak focusing element where the projection approximation holds (Proto- research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2020). 27, 305–318 Rafael Celestre et al.  Simulation of real CRL imperfections 309 Figure 3 Hierarchical depiction of the CRL. (a) A single thin element equivalent to several lenslets. This representation accounts for net refraction and absorption in one transmission element but ignores intra-lens spacing. (b) Multi-slice representation of a CRL. Here each lens of the stack is represented individually by one transmission element. Those are separated by a drift space corresponding to the typical distance between elements (s). (c) Not only can the CRL be represented as a series of thin elements separated by drift spaces, but ﬁgure errors can also be added. They are placed directly after the thin element representing a single X-ray lens.

[PAGE 6] popov & Valiev, 1998). The complex transmission repre- sentation of a CRL based on the MS approach is given by TCRLMSðzÞ  ¼ Tsingle lensðzÞ  DðsÞ Tsingle lensðzÞ N1; ð17Þ where DðsÞ is the operator formulation of the Fresnel free- space propagation over a distance s (distance between the centre of two adjacent lenses), from Section 1.4.1 of Paganin (2006). Equation (17) represents a wavefront * modiﬁed by a single lens complex transmission Tsinglelens, followed by free-space propagation DðsÞ over a distance s. The multiplication of the resulting electric ﬁeld by the transmission element and subsequent free-space propagation is carried out (N  1) times until the Nth lens is reached and the last element of the lens stack is accounted for. Optical imperfections measured with high spatial resolution can be readily converted into a transmission element by direct application of equation (12) to the height proﬁle, provided it is a 2D map of the phase defects. In this case, the height proﬁle will be the projected thickness of z(x,y) in the preceding equations. The MS model introduced earlier in this section can then be adapted to account for the phase errors of the indi- vidual lenses, TCRLMSðzÞ  ¼ Timperfect lensðzÞ  DðsÞ Timperfect lensðzÞ N1; ð18Þ with Timperfect lensðzÞ ¼ Tfigure errorsðzÞ Tsingle lensðzÞ: ð19Þ This extended version of the MS model is shown in Fig. 3(c). 4. Analysis of figure errors from metrology with X-ray speckle tracking To simulate the CRL performance on a beamline more accurately, one needs a 2D map of surface imperfections. Optical and tactile metrology methods are not the most appropriate to characterize single X-ray lenses due to their geometry (Lyatun et al., 2015) and their general insensitivity to subsurface defects (voids, inclusions etc). At-wavelength metrology is often more appropriate for obtaining the ﬁgure errors. Several methods are available using X-rays: tomo- graphy (Narikovich et al., 2017), grating interferometry (Rutishauser et al., 2011), speckle tracking (Berujon et al., 2013) and ptychography (Seiboth et al., 2016). Each error proﬁle used in the following simulations comes from a real 2D-Be lens individually characterized using X-ray speckle vectorial tracking (XSVT) (Berujon et al., 2020a,b) at the BM05 Instrumentation Beamline at the ESRF (Ziegler et al., 2004). This technique allows for a high spatial resolution (pixel size of 0.65 mm 0.65 mm) characterization of the lens ﬁgure error in projection approximation, which can be incorporated directly in the simulations. 4.1. Aberrations from metrology data Following Harvey et al. (1995), the ﬁgure errors of the lenses can be speciﬁed in terms of their spatial frequency, as they often have different effects on the image quality. Three regions are commonly used for that: low-, mid- and high- spatial frequencies. The low-spatial frequencies (LF) are responsible for changing the beam proﬁle and reducing the peak intensity. Mid- and high-spatial frequencies (HF) are responsible for scattering the light around the (focused) beam and have potential for broadening it, together with the expected reduction of the Strehl ratio. The low frequencies are related to the conventional optical aberrations (Born et al., 1999) and they can be described by a set of orthonormal polynomials. For optical systems with a circular aperture, 2D Zernike polynomials are often used (Mahajan & Dai, 2007), while for rectangular apertures (typical of 1D-focusing lenses) 2D Legendre polynomials are more common (Ye et al., 2014).6 The mid- and high-frequencies are the residuals from the polynomial ﬁt of the aberrated proﬁle. When referring to the full frequency extent, that is, the addition of the low-, mid- and high-spatial-frequencies, we use ‘full proﬁle’ (FF). From the analysis of the experimental data we can infer that the low frequencies span from 500 mm or 2 103 m1 (geometrical aperture of a lenslet) to 50 mm or 2 104 m1 (power spectral density cut-off; cf. Fig. 4), while the mid- and high- frequencies span from 50 mm or 2 104 m1 to 1.3 mm or 0.8 106 m1 (obtained from the Nyquist frequency of the measured data: determined by one over twice the detector resolution). Table 1 presents the radius of curvature, r.m.s. value of the ﬁgure errors and useful aperture obtained by XSVT for each simulated lenslet and the accumulated error proﬁle, that is, the net errors seen by a plane wavefront passing through the lens stack. Fig. 4 presents the accumulated ﬁgure errors for the simulated stack, along with their power spectrum density for the full proﬁle, low- and mid- and high-spatial frequencies; as well as the Zernike polynomial ﬁt of the full proﬁle, which is dominated by primary spherical aberration (Z11), tertiary spherical aberration (Z37) and horizontal coma (Z8). Tilts and defocus (Z2, Z3 and Z4) are not treated here as optical errors. 5. Simulation results In this section, we present the simulations of the main CRL models. All simulations presented here were made using Synchrotron Radiation Workshop (SRW) (Chubar & Elleaume, 1998)7, as it conveniently offers the possibility of fully and partially coherent calculations, and presents native parallelization with the MPI standard (Chubar et al., 2011). Fully coherent calculations were performed using a single CPU of an Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2680 v4 @ 2.40 GHz, while partial coherent simulations used 28 CPUs of the same computer infrastructure (NICE OAR cluster at the ESRF). research papers 310 Rafael Celestre et al.  Simulation of real CRL imperfections J. Synchrotron Rad. (2020). 27, 305–318 6 Using 2D Zernike and Legendre polynomials for describing conventional optical aberrations in X-ray lenses was ﬁrst presented by Koch et al. (2016). 7 Available at https://github.com/ochubar/srw.