[PAGE 1] Experimental study on thermal cycle performance of DD6 single crystal thermal barrier coating with film cooling holes Wenbing Tian *, Wenhu Wang , Yifeng Xiong , Yuanbin Wang School of Mechanical engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, Shaanxi, PR China Engineering Research Center of Advanced Manufacturing Technology for Aero Engine, Ministry of Education, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Thermal barrier coacted Film cooling holes Thermal cycling Laser processing A B S T R A C T Film-cooling holes play a critical role in increasing the inlet temperature of aviation gas turbine engines. However, the presence of these cooling holes can lead to local thermal and mechanical stresses during cold-hot cycling and high-temperature gas erosion, resulting in coating spallation along the cooling holes. Moreover, the use of picosecond laser drilling can exacerbate the coating's failure at these damaged locations. This study conducts thermal cycling experiments on DD6 single-crystal thermal barrier coatings with cooling holes, analyzing the effects of hole structure and laser processing on the thermal cycling life, surface morphology, and microstructure of the thermal barrier coatings. The results indicate that the damage and failure of the coatings are less severe for non-conventional holes compared to inclined holes, and the thermal cycling life of non- conventional holes is higher than that of inclined holes. The sharp side of the non-conventional hole exhibits smaller damage area compared to the inclined hole, while the blunt side shows no significant damage. Furthermore, when using a scanning speed of 300 mm/s and a spacing of 0.025 mm, the non-conventional holes demonstrate minimal coating damage and superior thermal cycling performance. Finally, the failure mechanism of thermal barrier coatings is analysed. 1. Introduction The film-cooling hole structure with thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) is widely utilized to safeguard the surface of high-temperature compo­ nents against environmental erosion, including heat, mechanical, and erosion effects. According to statistics, a yearly increase of 25 K in tur­ bine inlet temperatures is achieved, with approximately 15 K attributed to advancements in film-cooling technology [1]. However, under severe conditions such as thermal cycles and high-temperature gas erosion, localized thermal and mechanical stresses are generated around the film-cooling holes, leading to coating failures at the hole edges and significantly impacting the service life and performance of turbine blades. Additionally, the process of picosecond laser drilling can also cause localized damage to the coatings, further exacerbating the risk of failure. To address these issues, it is essential to improve the durability and performance of coatings by optimizing the structure of film-cooling holes and enhancing the fabrication processes, as illustrated in Fig. 1， irregular film-cooling holes are made by expanding the outlets of cy­ lindrical film-cooling holes in the flow or spreading direction to obtain better air film coverage and adherence to the wall, thus improving cooling efficiency [2]. A TBC system mainly consists of a ceramic top coat (TC), a thermally grown oxide (TGO), a metallic bond coat (BC) and an underlying sub­ strate. The mismatch of thermophysical and mechanical properties among the four layers lead to enormous residual stresses in the TBCs during cooling process [3]. At the rough interface between the TC and BC, the localized stresses can be compounded to the extent that signif­ icant out-of-plane stresses occur due to the undulation of the interface [4]. Additionally, the stress status of TBCs is redistributed because to the competition between growth stress in TGO and creep relaxation in all layers [5]. Microcracks are produced in the TC and TGO layers as well as at the TC/BC interface due to localized pressures [6]. During thermal cycling, these microcracks expand and merge together to form macro­ scopic cracks [7]. The majority of research on TBCs has focused on their internal stresses and failures using 2D models and basic thermal conditions (e.g., uniform temperature fluctuations or merely temperature gradients in the thickness direction). When applied to turbine blades, thermal barrier * Corresponding author at: School of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, Shaanxi, PR China. E-mail address: twb_npu@163.com (W. Tian). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Surface & Coatings Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/surfcoat https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2025.131899 Received 26 November 2024; Received in revised form 6 February 2025; Accepted 7 February 2025 Surface & Coatings Technology 499 (2025) 131899 Available online 11 February 2025 0257-8972/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

[PAGE 2] coatings (TBCs) can improve the high temperature resistance of the blade substrate and effectively raise the inlet temperature at the front of the turbine. However, they also cause significant stress concentrations around the cooling holes, which raises the likelihood that the TBC will fail. Kim et al. [8] discovered that a combination of hot and coolant gases generates a significant temperature gradient surrounding the cooling holes, resulting in additional localized thermal stresses in TBCs. Jiang et al. [9] numerically simulated the temperature and stress dis­ tributions within the thermal barrier coating-gas film cooling system under specific operational conditions. The findings indicated that the interplay of thermal mismatch, temperature gradient, and free edge effect around the holes intensified the localized stress state in the ther­ mal barrier coating; furthermore, the air film cooling also induced the inhomogeneous growth of TGOs due to the correlation between the oxidation rate and the temperature field. However, Li and Kang [10] discovered that without cooling air flow and disregarding the thermal gradient, stress concentration occurs around the cooling holes during thermal cycling, potentially leading to deformation or cracking of the resultant oxide layer. Tanaka et al. [11] conducted an experimental study on the evolution of thermo- mechanical fatigue damage in the thermal barrier coating at a circular through-hole, revealing that surface cracks emerged near the hole pe­ riphery, orientated perpendicular to the loading axis. Jiang et al. [12] investigated the stress evolution and fracture behavior of TBCs with cooling holes under cyclic thermal loading. The study revealed two types of cracks near the holes, including surface cracks and interface cracks, and the fusion of the two cracks led to localized TBC spalling. Meng et al. [13] considered non-uniform temperature fields and estab­ lished an analytical model to predict residual stresses in TBC-film cooling systems. This study demonstrated temperature field-induced discontinuous residual stress distribution in the interfacial region, which led to cracking at the interfaces of the TBC. Thick coatings effectively increase the insulation capacity of the system but also increase the delamination torque and shear stresses, and reducing the TC thickness improves the stability of the system. Consequently, the exis­ tence of cooling pores may substantially influence the failure and longevity of thermal barrier coatings (TBCs). Since the stress distribu­ tion is related to the geometry of the holes, the interfacial peeling and shear stresses around the cooling holes are expected to be different from the interfacial peeling and shear stresses at the outer edges of the TBC samples studied by Hsueh et al. [14] and Chen et al [15] Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the effect of air film pore geometry on the failure of TBCs. It can be observed that there are still significant deficiencies in the research on the thermal cycling performance of film-cooling holes with thermal barrier coatings. Investigating the influence of film-cooling hole structure and laser processing on the thermal cycling performance of single-crystal alloy with thermal barrier coatings is highly essential. Building upon this, the present study aims to examine the actual service conditions of film-cooling holes in turbine blades. Both inclined holes and symmetrical non-circular holes will be chosen as the research sub­ jects. Equivalent test specimens and a thermal cycling experimental plan for film-cooling holes with thermal barrier coatings will be designed accordingly. Subsequently, thermal cycling experiments will be con­ ducted on various non-circular film-cooling hole geometries and different processing parameters. Throughout the cycles, surface morphology, microstructure, and coating spallation around the holes will be analyzed and examined. This research aims to investigate the failure mechanisms of different structured film-cooling holes under thermal cycling conditions and to explore the impact of various laser processing techniques on the thermal cycling performance of film- cooling holes with thermal barrier coatings. Fig. 1. Model of turbine blade with cooling holes (a), and two typical film cooling holes and their cooling effect: inclined hole and irregular hole (b), the blue and red arrows in panel (b) represent cooling and hot air, respectively. W. Tian et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 499 (2025) 131899 2

[PAGE 3] 2. Experimental design translation 2.1. Experimental design In this experiment, inclined holes and symmetrical non-circular holes were chosen as the research subjects to investigate their influence on the thermal cycling performance of film-cooling holes with thermal barrier coatings. The processing parameters for the inclined holes were as fol­ lows: a hole diameter of 0.3 mm, an incident angle of 40◦, and a pro­ cessing energy of 30 W. The processing parameters for the non-circular holes are listed in Table 1. The thermal cycling loading scheme involved heating the samples from 25 ◦C to 1100 ◦C within 10 min and then holding them at the maximum temperature for 40 min. Subsequently, the samples were exposed to atmospheric conditions, and compressed air was used for rapid cooling with a duration of 10 min. Therefore, each hour constitutes a cycle, as depicted in Fig. 2 (b). The experimental study investigated the thermal cycling performance of film-cooling holes with thermal barrier coatings. Multiple sets of thermal cycling samples un­ derwent different thermal cycling experiments in a high-temperature furnace. The process of film-cooling holes with thermal barrier coat­ ings from their initial state to coating failure was analyzed. The evolu­ tion of surface/interface damage and failure modes after thermal cycling experiments were examined to reveal the damage mechanisms of film- cooling holes with thermal barrier coatings processed using pico­ second laser techniques. In this study, when the area of coating and substrate delamination or spallation exceeded 10 %(This is a standard developed by the collaborative research department) of the film-cooling hole aperture area, it was considered as coating failure. The number of thermal cycling cycles at this point was regarded as the thermal cycling life of the thermal barrier coating sample. 2.2. Experimental methods and experimental equipment Firstly, the specimens were processed using the same laser process­ ing parameters and method to obtain ten sets of thermal cycling sam­ ples. These samples were then cut into small flat plates measuring 5 mm * 15 mm * 2 mm. According to the loading conditions described in Section 2.1, thermal cycling experiments were conducted, and the specimens were removed at 100 h, 200 h, 300 h, 400 h, 500 h, 600 h, 700 h, 800 h, and 1000 h, respectively. In this paper, representative graphs of thermal cycling results will be selected and shown. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM,TESCAN MIRA3,Czech) was employed to capture the surfaces of thermal cycling samples at different time intervals. This allowed the assessment of the YSZ ceramic layer's spallation status at each cycle milestone. Image J software was utilized to quantitatively calculate the spallation rate of the ceramic layer. The spallation rate of the ceramic layer was defined as the ratio of the spallation area of the ceramic layer to the total surface area of the holes. The specimens were sectioned along their cross-sections using an embedding machine. Subsequently, the microstructural morphology of the film-coating cross-section around the holes was observed using a SEM. 3. Results and discussions 3.1. Thermal cycling life By observing the surface morphology of film-cooling holes with different geometries and analyzing the results using ImageJ software, it was determined that the surface damage and spallation area of the in­ clined holes exceeded 15 % after 600 h of thermal cycling. In contrast, for non-circular hole type 1, the spallation area around the hole was only 9.7 % after 800 h of thermal cycling. The thermal cycling lifetimes of film-cooling holes with different geometries are shown in Fig. 3. As evident from the graph, the thermal cycling lifetime of film-cooling holes with non-circular geometry is longer compared to the inclined holes, and the extent of damage and failure area is also smaller, indi­ cating better thermal cycling performance. 3.2. Surface morphology of coating around hole Fig. 4 shows the surface morphology images of film-cooling holes with inclined geometry at different thermal cycling times, including the initial state (0 h) and after 100 h, 600 h, 700 h, 800 h, and 1000 h of thermal cycling. From Fig. 4(a), it can be observed that the thermal barrier coating surface, without undergoing thermal cycling, appears relatively dense with almost no presence of holes. There are no cracks around the hole, and only minor machining damage is observed on the acute angle side of the hole, while the obtuse angle side exhibits no such damage. The coating adheres tightly to the substrate. After 100 thermal cycles, cracks start to appear around the hole. These cracks are relatively narrow, and cracks also initiate on the hole walls and propagate towards the hole periphery. The position of the film-cooling hole coating relative to the substrate becomes evident, and the number of cracks around the hole is relatively fewer than those farther away from the hole. Addi­ tionally, the coating damage on the acute angle side does not exhibit significant expansion, as depicted in Fig. 4(b). At 500 h of thermal cycling, the coating around the hole begins to experience oxidation but does not spall, as depicted in Fig. 4(c). Upon reaching 600 h of thermal cycling, damage and spallation of the coating are evident on the acute angle side of the hole, with the damage expanding from the bottom towards the center. Cracks on the hole wall also enlarge and extend along the wall towards the coating surface. At this stage, cracks develop in the bond coat and propagate inward, leading to the initial failure of the coating at the hole entrance, gradually extending and peeling away from the hole periphery. However, the ceramic layer far from the hole remains intact at this point, as shown in Fig. 4(d). After 1000 h of thermal cycling, significant spallation occurs around the film-cooling hole, as illustrated in Fig. 4(e). The coating in the vicinity of the hole has experienced extensive delamination. Fig. 5 shows the surface morphology images of film-cooling holes with symmetrical non-circular geometry under thermal cycling at 1100 ◦C for different durations, including 0 h, 100 h, 600 h, 700 h, 800 h, and 1000 h. As seen in Fig. 5(a), at the initial state (0 h), the coating surface around the film-cooling hole appears relatively dense with a tight bond to the substrate, and no machining damage is observed. However, the substrate hole wall exhibits roughness, indicating poorer machining quality. After 100 thermal cycles, cracks start to appear on the coating surface. These cracks are relatively narrow, extending up to several hundred micrometers. Cracks form on the obtuse angle side of the hole and propagate towards the hole periphery without causing coating spallation. A small number of cracks also develop on the acute angle side, and the regions with coating machining damage on both sides exhibit early oxidation reactions but have relatively fewer cracks, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Upon reaching 600 h of thermal cycling, oxidation of the coating around the hole intensifies, but no spallation occurs. The number of cracks increases on the obtuse angle side of the hole and appears to be distributed in a block-like pattern, as depicted in Fig. 5(c). At 700 h of thermal cycling, a small amount of spallation occurs on the Table 1 Processing parameter of hot cycle sample with shaped hole. Number Parameter Scanning speed (mm/s) Sweep spacing (mm) Pulse energy Special-shaped hole 1 300 0.03 4.5 W Special-shaped hole 2 100 0.06 4.5 W Special-shaped hole 3 300 0.025 4.5 W W. Tian et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 499 (2025) 131899 3

[PAGE 4] coating on the hole wall, as shown in Fig. 5(d). When thermal cycling reaches 800 h, coating damage and spallation become more significant, with spallation initiating on both sides of the hole wall. The upper hole wall coating exhibits a higher density of cracks, particularly closer to the bond coat, where the cracks are more concentrated, as shown in Fig. 5 (e). At 1000 h of thermal cycling, both sides of the hole wall have almost completely spalled, extending towards the upper and lower sides of the hole. At this stage, the total spallation area is approximately 9.7 % of the coating, as shown in Fig. 4(f). Comparing Figs. 4 and 5, it is observed that the crack initiation and propagation mechanisms in both types of structured film-cooling holes are similar. In both cases, cracks originate from the hole walls and propagate towards the hole periphery, gradually deepening and widening as the thermal cycling progresses. Multiple cracks connect with each other, ultimately leading to coating spallation. However, the locations of coating damage and spallation differ between the two holes. For the inclined holes, coating damage and spallation first occur on the lower side (acute angle side) of the hole and extend upwards until complete spallation around the hole periphery. On the other hand, for non-circular holes, coating damage initiates on both sides of the hole wall and extends both upward and downward. Comparing the spallation areas of inclined holes and non-circular holes, it is evident that non- Fig. 2. Thermal cycling test piece and thermal cycling experiment loading conditions. Fig. 3. Thermal cycle life of different holes: (a) the surface damage area of the inclined hole during the thermal cycle of 600 h; (b) the surface damage area of the shaped hole during 800 h thermal cycle; (c) thermal cycle life of different holes. W. Tian et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 499 (2025) 131899 4

[PAGE 5] circular holes have smaller spallation areas for the same number of thermal cycles, indicating better thermal cycling performance. 3.3. Analysis of cross section morphology and microstructure of holes Fig. 6 shows the cross-sectional morphology of the coating around the inclined film-cooling hole at different thermal cycling times, with a magnification of 1000 times. In Fig. 6(a), the as-deposited coating cross- section of the inclined hole sample is depicted, with specific dimensions indicated in the labeled diagram. It can be observed that the picosecond laser-prepared thermal barrier coating on the obtuse angle side of the inclined hole exhibits almost no damage. However, on the acute angle side, the ceramic layer shows partial damage due to the blowing pres­ sure of the plasma during the processing, which carries molten plasma outward. The ceramic layer, bond coat, and substrate are tightly bonded, with a relatively smooth interface without any protrusions. Fig. 6(b) displays the cross-sectional morphology of the coating around the inclined film-cooling hole after 300 h of thermal cycling, with a magnification of 1000 times. Relative to Fig. 6(a)，on the acute angle side, significant coating damage and spallation are evident. A corrosion-resistant Al2O3 oxide layer (TGO) forms at the interface be­ tween the ceramic layer and the bond coat due to the thermal cycling process. The TGO layer on the obtuse angle side appears relatively smooth, while on the acute angle side, it exhibits pronounced un­ dulations and is relatively thicker. This observation indicates that the coating damage on the acute angle side promotes easier oxygen pene­ tration and oxidation reactions at the damaged regions, leading to crack propagation inward. Consequently, the coating damage is more pro­ nounced on the acute angle side of the film-cooling hole compared to the obtuse angle side. In Fig. 6(c), after 700 h of thermal cycling, the damage and peeling of the coating are more severe compared to 300 h. The thickness of TGO layer increased from 10.8 μm to 13.5 μm, and numerous longitudinal cracks form and widen within the coating. This allows a substantial amount of oxygen to penetrate the coating. The longitudinal cracks combine with transverse cracks and further expand in the transverse direction, almost spanning the entire SEM image. Additionally, the area of oxidation in the bond coat increases, leading to the appearance of white precipitates. In Fig. 6(d), after 1000 h of thermal cycling, the coating experiences further damage and spallation. The thickness of TGO layer gradually increases to 15.63 μm, with little difference between the thickness on both sides. The transverse cracks continue to grow wider, and the columnar grains at the top region gradually detach as a whole, with transverse cracks acting as boundaries. On the obtuse angle side, oxidation damage becomes evident, and the transverse cracks expand into the interior of the coating. A clear separation occurs between the ceramic layer and the TGO layer, and fine cracks appear between the bond coat and the TGO layer, indicating a tendency towards separation. Additionally, the presence of white precipitates in the bond coat in­ creases significantly compared to the 700-h condition. Fig. 7 displays the cross-sectional morphology of the coating around the non-circular hole 2 at different thermal cycling times, with a magnification of 1000 times. Specific dimensions are indicated in the labeled diagram. In Fig. 7(a), it can be observed that during the prepa­ ration process, the coating on the obtuse angle side exhibits almost no machining damage, with only minor cracks present. On the acute angle side, the ceramic layer shows partial damage due to the blowing pres­ sure of the plasma during processing. However, the damaged area is relatively smaller compared to the inclined hole configuration. The Fig. 4. Surface morphology of inclined hole coating under different thermal cycles (200 times). W. Tian et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 499 (2025) 131899 5

[PAGE 6] ceramic layer, bond coat, and substrate are tightly bonded, with a relatively smooth interface and no visible protrusions. Nevertheless, Compare Fig. 6 (a),unlike the inclined hole, there are slight longitudinal cracks in the vicinity of the hole for this non-circular hole configuration. In Fig. 7(b), after 300 h of thermal cycling, coating damage and spallation occur on the acute angle side of the non-circular film-cooling hole. The damaged area increases, and no transverse cracks appear on the coating surface around the hole. However, longitudinal cracks develop within the coating. Similar to the inclined hole, a layer of TGO forms at the interface between the ceramic layer and the bond coat on both sides of the non-circular hole. Unlike the TGO layer in the inclined hole, the TGO layers on both sides of the non-circular hole have similar thickness, indicating a more uniform oxidation degree. Additionally, the oxidation on the acute angle side of the non-circular hole occurs at a slower rate compared to the acute angle side of the Fig. 6(b), resulting in distinct undulations in both the acute and obtuse angle side TGO layers. In Fig. 7(c), after 700 h of thermal cycling, the TGO layer thickness increases from 10.85 μm to 14.8 μm, and the interface between the TGO layer and the ceramic layer exhibits heightened undulations. Coating damage is more pronounced on the acute angle side, where transverse cracks at the TGO-ceramic layer interface extend transversely into the interior of the coating and connect with longitudinal cracks within the coating. The area of oxidation in the bond coat also increases, accom­ panied by the appearance of white precipitates, similar to the observa­ tions in Fig. 6(c). In Fig. 7(d), after 1000 h of thermal cycling, the TGO layer thickness exhibits a noticeable increase, and transverse cracks penetrate through the entire coating. The columnar grain region at the top gradually sep­ arates from both the TGO layer and the bond coat along the transverse cracks. The TGO layer undergoes layer-by-layer fragmentation and protrudes upward, while significant cracks appear between the bond coat and the TGO layer. The white precipitates in the bond coat increase significantly compared to the 700-h condition(Fig. 7(c)). From the comparison of the cross-sectional morphologies, it can be observed that the coating damage around the film-cooling hole of the non-circular hole geometry is relatively smaller compared to the in­ clined hole. The damage area on the acute angle side of the non-circular hole is less pronounced than that of the inclined hole, and no significant damage and spallation occur on the obtuse angle side. The coating damage caused by the film-cooling hole in the non-circular geometry has a minor impact, while the inclined hole significantly affects the coating damage. The typical form of coating damage around the inclined hole involves the propagation of interfacial cracks from the hole periphery towards the interior of the coating, coupled with the expansion of lon­ gitudinal cracks within the coating. 3.4. Thermal cycling performance of different processing parameters Fig. 5 shows the surface morphology of non-circular hole 1. In this figure, no evident oxide stripes are observed. However, at 100 h of Fig. 5. Surface morphology of special-shaped hole 1 coating under different thermal cycles (200 times). W. Tian et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 499 (2025) 131899 6