[PAGE 1] ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE Inelastic Deformation and Fatigue Cracking in TBC around Film Cooling Hole Subjected to Thermomechanical Loading Xiaojie Han1 • Masayuki Arai2 • Yuxian Meng2 Submitted: 15 July 2025 / in revised form: 20 October 2025 / Accepted: 21 October 2025 / Published online: 12 November 2025  The Author(s) 2025, modiﬁed publication 2026 Abstract In recent years, the increase in gas turbine inlet temperatures has led to the problem of excessive temper- atures in gas turbine blades. To address this issue, thermal barrier coatings (TBCs), internal cooling, and ﬁlm cooling have been applied to the hot-side surfaces of the blades. However, it remains necessary to manage crack initiation and spalling damage of the TBC caused by thermal fatigue around the cooling holes. In this study, a thermomechanical fatigue analysis was performed on a TBC/IN738LC plate- type substrate with cooling holes using ﬁnite element analysis software. The analysis incorporated a damage- coupled inelastic constitutive equation for TBC developed by our research group. The damage and thermal stress ﬁelds around the cooling holes under cyclic loading were analyzed under thermomechanical fatigue conditions, considering both in-phase conditions—where the temper- ature and load patterns were synchronized—and out-of- phase conditions, where they were out of sync. Under temperature and cyclic loading conditions where the mechanical stress level around the cooling holes was lower than the thermal stress, thermal fatigue cracks were initi- ated at the edges of the cooling hole, notably at the 3 and 9 o’clock positions, corresponding to the loading direction, and the cracks propagated near the top coating (TC)/sub- strate interface. Conversely, under loading conditions where the mechanical stress exceeded the thermal stress, thermal fatigue cracks initiated at the edges of the cooling hole at 6 and 12 o’clock positions, and the cracks propa- gated rapidly near the TC surface. The stress level was higher in the out-of-phase condition than in the in-phase condition, and the fatigue crack initiation life was shorter. However, the differences in the temperature loading pat- terns had little effect on the crack initiation location. Keywords cooling hole  crack initiation and propagation  damage coupled inelastic constitutive model  ﬁnite element analysis  non-local damage theory  TBC  thermomechanical fatigue Introduction The main factors causing damage to gas turbine (GT) blades are corrosion, erosion, creep, and thermal fatigue. Corrosive elements contained in the fuel, such as sulfur, vanadium, lead, and sodium, cause pitting and material removal from the blade surface. Creep and thermal fatigue also lead to cracking on the leading edge of the blades, which is considered one of the most critical types of damage requiring attention to prevent catastrophic accidents. In recent years, the inlet temperature of GTs has increased due to improvements in thermal efﬁciency, resulting in higher metal temperatures in the blades. To reduce the high metal temperatures, a thermal barrier coating (TBC) has been applied to the hot-side surface of the blade, which is efﬁciently cooled by internal convec- tion cooling inside the blade and ﬁlm cooling using air emitted from cooling holes. However, a steep temperature gradient is formed in the blade wall, and compressive and tensile stresses are generated alternately, leading to thermal fatigue and cracking at the edge of the cooling holes due to & Masayuki Arai marai@rs.tus.ac.jp 1 Graduate School of Engineering, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo, Japan 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo, Japan 123 J Therm Spray Tech (2026) 34:3376–3388 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11666-025-02106-0

[PAGE 2] stress concentration. Chowdhury et al. (Ref 1) reported the failure modes and accident cases of GT components in detail. Their report warns that catastrophic accidents are likely to occur due to thermal fatigue cracks initiated at the edge of a cooling hole on the leading edge of the blade. Therefore, to guarantee the long-term reliability of GTs, it is necessary to properly evaluate the thermal stress distri- bution and crack initiation life around the cooling holes in GT blades with TBC. However, despite this societal demand, detailed experimental and analytical studies addressing this issue remain limited. Li et al. (Ref 2) conducted high-temperature fatigue tests on plate-shaped specimens made of single-crystal Ni superalloy with machined cooling holes of 1 mm in diameter. The test temperatures were 700 and 1000 C, and the applied stress levels ranged from 400 to 700 MPa. Under all test conditions, cracks initiated at the center of the plate thickness at the cooling hole and then propagated along the slip plane. It was also pointed out that differences in test conditions affect the location of fatigue crack ini- tiation. Under the fatigue condition of 1000 C and 45 MPa, fatigue cracks initiated at the edge of the circular hole on a plane nearly perpendicular to the loading direc- tion, whereas at 700 C and 650 MPa, fatigue cracks ini- tiated at the edge of the circular hole at an angle of 45 to the loading direction. Pei et al. (Ref 3) conducted high- temperature fatigue tests at 850 C on plate-shaped speci- mens made of single-crystal Ni-based superalloys with multiple cooling holes. The inelastic ﬁnite element analysis showed that the fatigue life predicted based on the maxi- mum principal strain was not very accurate. However, the crystal plasticity analysis was able to predict the fatigue life with good accuracy. Tanaka et al. (Ref 4) conducted thermal fatigue tests on plate-shaped specimens consisting of an IN738LC substrate, a CoNiCrAlY alloy, and YSZ, with a circular hole of 1.3 mm in diameter. The TC surface was heated by radiation, and the back surface of the sub- strate was cooled with air. The thermal fatigue test revealed that a crack was initiated at the edge of the circular hole on the plane perpendicular to the loading direction, and the crack opened widely due to the accumulation of inelastic strain in the substrate. Thermal structural analyses around cooling holes under thermal fatigue loading have also been conducted by Jiang et al. (Ref 5), who performed a thermal stress calculation based on plate bending theory using a hollow cylindrical model with a cooling hole consisting of at TC layer, a bond coating (BC) layer, a thermally grown oxide (TGO) layer, and a substrate. The results showed that cracks could ini- tiate at the edge of the cooling hole during the cooling process. Wang et al. (Ref 6) derived an analytical solution for the stress distribution when TBC and TGO layers applied to the inner surface of a cooling hole were uniformly subjected to a temperature cycle. Assuming that the TBC layer follows an elastic constitutive model, and that the TGO layer and substrate follow elastic–perfectly plastic constitutive models, they derived an analytical solution from the force balance equation and the statically indeterminate displacement condition and also performed a numerical analysis. As a result, it was shown that thermal strain is concentrated around the cooling hole during cooling and reheating. Qiao et al. (Ref 7) performed a stress analysis of the TBC layer and its interface near the cooling hole. The model included a TC layer with a thickness of 0.25 mm, a BC layer of 0.15 mm, and a TGO layer of 0.001 mm on the surface of a plate-shaped sub- strate. The diameter of the cooling hole was set to 1 mm, and the angle with the horizontal direction was 60. Computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) and thermal struc- tural analyses were performed with a high-temperature gas ﬂow velocity of 128 m/s and a gas temperature of 1287 C, as well as a cooling gas ﬂow velocity of 106 m/s and a gas temperature of 526 C. Hooke’s law was assumed for the TC layer, while an elastic–plastic creep constitutive model was applied to the BC layer, TGO layer, and substrate. It was shown that a steep temperature gradient occurred in the TC layer from the high-temperature gas inlet side to the downstream side. Thermal structural analysis revealed that the normal stress at the TC/TGO interface at the edge of the cooling hole was low, while the interfacial shear stress was concentrated, which could lead to delamination of the TC layer. Liu et al. (Ref 8) performed an inelastic analysis by applying a Chaboche-type viscoplastic constitutive equation to the substrate, under the assumption that the TBC layer deforms elastically. As is well known, the TBC layer consists of an 8YZ layer (TC layer) formed by atmospheric plasma spraying and a CoNiCrAlY layer (BC layer) formed by low-pressure plasma spraying or high-velocity ﬂame spraying. The mechanical properties of the BC layer are similar to those of the substrate, IN738LC, while the TC layer, with its porous structure, exhibits highly unique mechanical prop- erties. One of the authors (Ref 9) conducted bending tests using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) on free- standing TC layers cut from a TC-coated specimen. It was found that the freestanding TC sample exhibited a non- linear stress–strain curve under bending loads, which occurred due to the sliding deformation of splats in the microscopic structure of the TC layer. As the inelastic deformation increased, microcracks formed along the splat boundaries. Based on these SEM observations, they pro- posed a damage-coupled inelastic constitutive equation, in which the number density of microcracks was deﬁned as a damage parameter, assuming that inelastic strain increased with the number density of microcracks (Ref 10). The developed constitutive equation was incorporated into the J Therm Spray Tech (2026) 34:3376–3388 3377 123

[PAGE 3] commercial ﬁnite element (FE) analysis software MARC, along with an evolution equation for the damage parame- ters. A bilinear elastic–plastic constitutive equation was applied to the BC layer, and a Chaboche-type viscoplastic constitutive equation was applied to the substrate to ana- lyze a two-dimensional TBC/IN738LC plate-shaped model subjected to tensile loading. The stress–strain curves obtained from high-temperature tensile tests showed good agreement with the FE results (Ref 11). Furthermore, the software was extended to simulate fatigue crack propaga- tion based on a non-localization algorithm. Both in-phase and out-of-phase thermal fatigue analyses were performed. It was demonstrated that thermal fatigue cracks propagat- ing in the TC layer and along the TC/BC interface could be appropriately simulated (Ref 12). In addition, the evolution equation for the thermally grown oxide (TGO) layer formed at the interface between the TC and BC layers was incorporated, and the evolution of internal stress in the TC layer due to the formation of the TGO layer under long- term high-temperature exposure was numerically simulated (Ref 13). In the past, our research group performed detailed numerical simulations of TBC systems; however, the problems addressed thus far were limited to two-dimen- sional models. As noted in the background of this study, in actual GT blades, cracks are generated around ﬁlm cooling holes due to the steep temperature gradient formed in the blade wall. In this study, we extend the inelastic ﬁnite element analysis software, which incorporates the damage- coupled inelastic constitutive equation and non-localization algorithm, to a three-dimensional application. The stress and damage ﬁelds in a TC layer/IN738LC plate-shaped substrate with ﬁlm cooling holes subjected to cyclic tem- perature and displacement were investigated, and the thermal fatigue crack initiation life at the edge of a cooling hole was predicted. It should be noted that the BC layer is not considered in this FE model because the mechanical properties of the BC layer are similar to those of the sub- strate, as mentioned above, and this reduces the memory requirement for FE calculations. Outline of Inelastic Constitutive Models TC Layer In this study, the damage-coupled inelastic constitutive model proposed by Arai et al. (Ref 10-13) was applied to the TC layer of thermally sprayed YSZ. Assuming that inelastic strain occurs because of microcracks at the splat boundaries in the microstructure, the inelastic constitutive equation can be expressed as follows: eij ¼ S0 ijkl þ 8 3 D 1  m2 TC pETC   Kijkl   rkl þ aTCDTdij ðEq 1Þ where eij is the total strain tensor, rkl is the stress tensor, and S0 ijkl is the elastic compliance tensor which is expressed as, S0 ijkl ¼ 1 þ mTC ETC dikdjl  mTC 1 þ mTC dijdkl   ðEq 2Þ where ETC is Young’s modulus of TC layer, mTC is Pois- son’s ratio, aTC is the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion, DT is the temperature change from reference temperature, and dij is the Kronecker delta. Kijkl is the compliance tensor related to the microcrack opening displacement.where h and / are the azimuth and rotation angles of the microc- racks. gij 0 components are, g110 ¼ cos / g120 ¼ sin / g130 ¼ h g210 ¼  sin / g220 ¼ cos / g230 ¼ 0 g310 ¼ h cos / g320 ¼ h sin / g330 ¼ 1 8 < : ðEq 4Þ Assuming that each damage parameter evolves inde- pendently, damage parameter D can be expressed as the sum of the following three components. _D ¼ _Deh _Deihrmi þ _Dchrmi þ _Df ðEq 5Þ where _ ð Þ is the time derivative term, De is the elastic damage, Dc is the creep damage, and Df is the fatigue damage, which have the following evolutionary equation: Kijkl h ð Þ ¼ 1 2  m Z2p 0 d/ g1i 0 / ð Þg3j 0 / ð Þ þ g1j 0 / ð Þg3i 0 / ð Þ   g3k 0 / ð Þg1l 0 / ð Þ þ g2i 0 / ð Þg3j 0 / ð Þ þ g2j 0 / ð Þg3i 0 / ð Þ   g3k 0 / ð Þg2l 0 / ð Þ ( ) þ Z2p 0 d/g3i 0 / ð Þg3j 0 / ð Þg3k 0 / ð Þg3l 0 / ð Þ ðEq 3Þ 3378 J Therm Spray Tech (2026) 34:3376–3388 123

[PAGE 4] _De ¼ 1 2 D0A pp p0  n1 þ qj j q0  m1 ( ) ðEq 6Þ _Dc ¼ 1 2 D0B pp p0  n2 þ qj j q0  m2 ( ) ðEq 7Þ _Df ¼ 1 2Sf reqeeq _eeq   ðEq 8Þ where D0 is the damage coefﬁcient; A and B are the coefﬁcients of evolution; p0 and q0 are stress constants; and m1, n1, m2, and n2 are the indices that characterize how damage evolves with stress. Sf is the coefﬁcient of fatigue damage evolution, and req and eeq are equivalent stress and strain. hi is the Macaulay bracket, and tractions p and q are given by p ¼ 1 2 h2r11 þ 1 2 h2r22 þ r33 ðEq 9Þ The material constants are referred to (Ref 10-13). IN738LC Substrate The Ni-based superalloy IN738LC was used as the sub- strate material. A Chaboche-type viscoplastic constitutive equation is used. An outline of the constitutive equation is presented in this paper. The total strain eij is expressed as eij ¼ ee ij þ ein ij þ aSUBDTdij ðEq 11Þ where ee ij is elastic strain tensor: ee ij ¼ 1 þ mSUB ESUB rij  mSUB ESUB rkkdij ðEq 12Þ where ESUB is Young’s modulus of the substrate, mSUB is Poisson’s ratio, and aSUB is the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion. ein ij is the inelastic strain. _ein ij ¼ 3 2 _p rij0  Xij0 J r  X ð Þ ðEq 13Þ where 0 ð Þ is the deviatoric component, and Xij is the back stress tensor. J r  X ð Þ is expressed as J r  X ð Þ ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 3 2 rij0  Xij0   rij0  Xij0   r ðEq 14Þ and _p is _p ¼ J r  X ð Þ K n ðEq 15Þ where n and K are the material constants. The evolutionary equation of the back stress is expressed as _Xij ¼ C 2 3 a_ep ij  Xij  Yij   _p  cJ X ð Þm1Xij þ Xij Ca o Ca ð Þ oT _T ðEq 16Þ where C, a, c, m are material constants. The evolutionary equation of the inner state variable Yij is: _Yij ¼ a Yst Xij J X ð Þ þ Yij   cJ X ð Þm ðEq 17Þ where a and Yst are material constants. The material con- stants are provided in (Ref 10-13). Implementation of Inelastic Constitutive Models and Non-Localization Algorithm in FE Software TC Layer To incorporate the inelastic constitutive equations of the TC layer into MARC (MARC2023, MSC Software), the user subroutine ‘‘HYPELA2’’ was used. A combination of the forward Euler method and the Newton–Raphson method was adopted to improve both computational efﬁ- ciency and accuracy. First, the time steps are advanced using the forward Euler method, and then, the solution of the nonlinear equations at each time step is updated using the Newton–Raphson method. The calculation procedure is as follows: MARC provides the strain vector en and stress vector rn at the n th step, as well as the strain increment vector Den as input arguments to ‘‘HYPELA2.’’ Using these data, the stress vector is updated using the forward Euler method as follows: q ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r2 13 þ r2 23 þ h2 r2 33 þ 1 2 r2 11 þ r2 22   þ r2 12  r2 13  r2 23  r11 þ r22 ð Þr33 s ðEq 10Þ J Therm Spray Tech (2026) 34:3376–3388 3379 123

[PAGE 5] rnþ1 ¼ rn þ F rn ð Þ ½ 1Den ðEq 18Þ where F rn ð Þ is tangential stiffness matrix. There will still be an error between the updated rnþ1 and the true stress vector r 0 nþ1 at the n þ 1 th step. To obtain an approximate solution, the Newton–Raphson method is used to minimize the error function L rnþ1 ð Þ and calculate the corrected stress vector rnþ1. L rnþ1 ð Þ ¼k enþ1  f rnþ1 ð Þ ½ rnþ1 k2 ðEq 19Þ Here, k  k is the norm. In this way, an accurate stress vector rnþ1 can be obtained by updating the solution using the implicit method. Consequently, the tangential stiffness matrix is also updated. In this study, the stress vector rnþ1 was updated iteratively until the value of the error function L rnþ1 ð Þ in Eqn. (19) fell below 10-10. IN738LC Substrate To incorporate the viscoelastic–plastic constitutive equa- tion of IN738LC into the commercial ﬁnite element anal- ysis software MARC, the analysis algorithm was based on the method proposed by Kulling et al. (Ref 14). A user subroutine, ‘‘UVSCPL,’’ was used to implement it in MARC. This subroutine enables the handling of any vis- coplastic constitutive equation by specifying the inelastic strain increment, inelastic strain rate, and stress increment. Non-Localization Algorithm In this study, a crack propagation algorithm based on the nonlocal damage theory developed by Arai et al. (Ref 12) was adopted. In conventional crack propagation algo- rithms, crack propagation is determined based on the damage parameter D in the element ahead of the crack tip. However, stress and damage ﬁelds exhibit singularities near the crack tip, leading to locally high values of the damage parameter D. As a result, crack propagation becomes excessively fast, which may deviate from the actual behavior. Therefore, in this study, the stability of the crack propagation simulation was improved by averaging the damage ﬁeld over the volume near the crack tip, a method referred to as the non-localization algorithm. As shown in Fig. 1, in the non-localization algorithm, the evolution of damage at position x near the crack tip is considered to be governed not only by the state variables at that point but also by the variable ﬁelds in the surrounding vicinity. If the damage ﬁeld within the circular region X affects the evolution of damage at position x, the damage value D at position x is delocalized as follows which is given as the nonlocal damage value D. D x ð Þ ¼ R X D n ð Þ/ x; n ð ÞdX R X / x; n ð ÞdX ðEq 20Þ where n is an arbitrary position in the domain X. /ðx; nÞ is a weight function which is expressed by, / x; n ð Þ ¼ exp  x  n j j d ðEq 21Þ where x  n j j is the distance between positions x and n. Also, d is the characteristic length, which is a parameter that determines the size of the region X. Applying the non-localization algorithm requires inte- gral calculations for continuous variable ﬁelds. However, such calculations are generally difﬁcult to apply in ﬁnite element analyses. Therefore, a cell model was used to simplify the non-localization algorithm through dis- cretization. In this model, each element is considered as a Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the non-localization algorithm 3380 J Therm Spray Tech (2026) 34:3376–3388 123

[PAGE 6] cell, and the damage ﬁeld is assumed to be constant within each cell. As a result, the damage ﬁeld within the domain X is discretized, and the non-localization algorithm can be simpliﬁed as follows: D x ð Þ ¼ PN i¼1 D ni ð Þ/ x; ni ð Þ PN i¼1 / x; ni ð Þ ðEq 22Þ where N is the number of elements in the region X. The procedure for the crack propagation simulation in this study is as follows. First, the nonlocal damage parameter D is calculated in the region near the crack tip. Once D reaches the critical damage value DC, it is deter- mined that the crack has propagated. To express this in the analysis, the stiffness of the corresponding element is set to zero. This process is repeated to simulate crack propaga- tion. Arai et al. (Ref 12) performed monotonic tensile tests on a freestanding TC sample at room temperature (300 K), 723 K, and 1273 K to determine the critical damage value DC. Consequently, it was conﬁrmed that the critical dam- age value is a linear function of temperature, expressed as follows: DC ¼ 1:083  102 þ 5:548  102T ðEq 23Þ To ensure stable crack propagation analysis, the ele- ments within the domain X were re-meshed when the damage parameter D reached 0.8 times the critical value DC. Furthermore, since crack propagation behavior is inﬂuenced by both the element size and the characteristic length d, the value of d was set to three times the min- imum element size, based on a parameter analysis. To incorporate the crack propagation algorithm into the commercial ﬁnite element software MARC, the user sub- routine ‘‘UACTIVE’’ was employed. The user subroutines ‘‘NEWSV’’ and ‘‘UADAP’’ in MARC were also utilized. The ‘‘UACTIVE’’ subroutine can disable any element in the model. ‘‘NEWSV’’ allows for the re-division of ele- ments, and ‘‘UADAP’’ updates the state function of the newly divided elements. By combining these subroutines, crack propagation could be effectively modeled in MARC. Thermomechanical Fatigue Analysis Analysis Procedure A TBC-coated model with a cooling hole is shown in Fig. 2 (a). This model consists of two layers: a TC layer and a substrate with a cooling hole penetrating its center. Fig- ure 2 (b) shows the FE model corresponding to Fig. 2 (a), which was meshed with 3D tetrahedral full integration elements (element type ‘‘134’’) with four nodes. The AUTOMESH function in MARC was used for meshing. The element size was set to 0.04 mm near the TC layer and the TC/substrate interface, and 0.15 mm in other regions. The element size was also gradually increased with dis- tance from the interface. The number of elements was 110,469, and the number of nodes was 20,708. As a boundary condition, all nodes at the right edge of the FE model were tied to a single connecting node, and cyclic displacement was applied to this node. In the FE analysis, the temperature and displacement control patterns shown in Fig. 3 were repeatedly applied to the model. In this study, two cases were considered: one where temperature and displacement changes were in phase (in phase) and another where they were out of phase (out of phase). The analysis conditions are listed in Table 1. FE analysis was performed for up to 60 cycles in all cases. The temperature and dis- placement changes followed triangular waveforms with a period of 300 s. Cyclic displacement was applied to the connecting node on the right side of the model. The tem- perature range was 473 to 873 K. The FE model was assumed to be uniformly heated. Before starting the load- ing, the model was thermally expanded from room tem- perature (293 K) to 473 K over a duration of 200 s, after which cyclic displacement was applied. The Young’s Fig. 2 Schematic illustration of a TBC-coated plate subjected to both temperature and displacement. (a) Problem geometry and boundary conditions; (b) FE model of a TBC-coated plate J Therm Spray Tech (2026) 34:3376–3388 3381 123