[PAGE 1] Deformation Prediction Theory of Thermal Barrier Coatings near Cooling Holes under Thermal Cycling Jian-Xin Wang, Hong-Tu Sun, Qing-Tao Gong, Feng-Xun Li,* and Zhen-Zhe Li* Cite This: ACS Omega 2023, 8, 13048−13058 Read Online ACCESS Metrics & More Article Recommendations ABSTRACT: Thermal barrier coating (TBC) systems are widely adopted in gas turbine blades to improve the thermal efficiency of gas turbine engines. However, TBC failure will happen due to the thermal stress between the different layers of the TBC systems. The traditional two-layer theoretical model only considers TGO (thermally grown oxide) and a substrate in the inner cooling hole with the surface uncoated, which results in poor prediction of the deformations of the TBC systems. It should be mentioned that the effect of TBC is very important because the thickness of TBC is much larger than the TGO thickness. In this study, a new three-layer theoretical model was derived, which is composed of the cylindrical TGO and TBC mounted in the substrate with a circular hole, and the stress and strain of TGO near the cooling hole under the condition of the thermal cycles were calculated. The high temperature characteristics of TGO and the substrate including the high temperature strength and growth ratio were from the experiments. The results show that the strain of the developed three-layer model is irrelevant with increasing number of cycles, which indicates that TBC in the cooling hole significantly inhibits the deformation of TGO near the cooling hole. Therefore, aimed at confirming the feasibility of the three-layer theoretical model, the finite element analysis with coating in the cooling hole and on the surface was carried out with a three-layer axisymmetric model, which proves that the 3-layer theoretical model can predict the deformation trend near the cooling hole. 1. INTRODUCTION The efficiency of the gas turbine engine for the aircraft is significantly related to the level of the operating temperature which is promoted to higher than 1700 °C. The film cooling technology of the turbine blade and the thermal barrier coating systems (TBCs) are the effective heat insulation methods1−5 to improve the thermal tolerance and antioxidant capacity of the gas turbine engines continuously. TBCs are composed of TBC, underlying substrates (super- alloy), BC (bond coat), and TGO (thermally grown oxide). Although TGO can protect the underlying super-alloy from hot corrosion, it is also the main cause of the invalidation of TBCs.6,7 The failure of TBCs is mainly due to the TGO growth, which is divided into the thickness direction (transverse) and the lateral (in-plane). Because of the difference of the thermal expansion coefficients (CTEs) between TGO and other layers, the stress increases with the increase of TGO thickness.8,9 The thermal expansion coefficients of TBC and BC are 10 × 10−6/ °C, which are similar with the substrate (12 × 10−6/°C), but the TGO layer has a very low CTE of 6 × 10−6/°C. During the heating or cooling process, TGO will cause a stress of 3∼6GPa.1,10,11 Furthermore, the thermal cycles will cause the microcracks or TBC separation at the interface of TGO/BC or TGO/TBC. The other growth of the TGO is in the lateral direction. At the operating temperatures, the new TGO forms along the existing TGO grains boundaries, and pushes the existing TGO grains toward lateral sides, leading to the compressive stress in the TGO layer, i.e., TGO growth stress.12,13 For the gas turbine blade, air cooling hole technology is widely used except TBCs, which construct air film to protect the turbine blade from hot corrosion.14−18 Most studies on the cooling holes focused on the analysis of heat insulation efficiency of the TBC. The failure mechanism of TBC in the turbine blades could be more complicated. During the operation of the turbine engine, not only the thermal fatigue but also the thermal stress caused by the CTE difference of each layer of TBCs, the influence of structure and thermal load must be considered. Received: January 16, 2023 Accepted: March 21, 2023 Published: March 31, 2023 Article http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf © 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society 13048 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.3c00307 ACS Omega 2023, 8, 13048−13058 Downloaded via 142.249.36.20 on July 9, 2026 at 14:30:32 (UTC). See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

[PAGE 2] Li et al.19 investigated the plastic deformation and micro- crack initiation behavior near the cooling holes by using the in situ tension test at ambient temperatures. The results revealed that the cooling holes have reduced the tensile strength of the Ni-based alloy by about 10%, and the cracks near the cooling holes initiate along the slip lines. Zhao et al.20 conducted creep fatigue experiments on tubular specimens with the cooling holes. They found that the fracture of the cooling hole is caused by the stress concentration and high temperature deformation, which will produce initial cracks along the edge of the hole. According to the fracture research results of TBC by Jiang et al.,21 two fracture forms were found around the sample with the cooling hole after the thermal cycle, namely, the surface crack and the interface crack of the finish coat. However, during the sample processing, the TBC inside the cooling hole was removed because TBC blocks the cooling hole. If there is TBC inside the cooling hole, the stress concentration near the cooling hole may be more serious. Rebollo et al.22 made a groove on the surface of FeCr alloy sample, and the thermal fatigue experiments were performed in the high temperature environment. The results show that TGO near the groove at a constant temperature has not been changed, but the groove after thermal fatigue processing has been significantly changed. Also, it is found that deformation under the conditions of constant temperature and cyclic oxidation can be significantly restrained when TBC is added. In order to recognize the deformation mechanism of the microcracks clearly, Evans et al.23,24 performed series of theoretical and finite element simulations. At first, a spherical and theoretical model, which is composed of TGO and BC was constructed, and TGO deformations near the groove under the thermal cycling were analyzed. Also, the theoretical model was verified using the finite element analysis. However, the material properties in their research were assumed data such as the constant yield strengths of TGO and BC for every temper- ature. In our previous study,25−27 a 2-layer theoretical model was derived to study the hole deformation under the thermal cycling loads. However, the results of the 2-layer theoretical model give good agreement on the behavior of the hole with the TGO layer forming on the inner surfaces as well as the lateral outer surface of the hole. Although the results are very accurate, the experimental and theoretical models focused on the two layers of TGO and the substrate, which has some limitations in predicting the deformation of the real TBC system. In this paper, the mechanical behavior of the cooling holes under thermal cycling was analyzed by using a new three-layer model for TBCs. By establishing a three-layer theoretical Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the derivation process: (1) substrate; (2) TGO; and (3) TBC. ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Article https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.3c00307 ACS Omega 2023, 8, 13048−13058 13049

[PAGE 3] analysis model, the stress and deformation near the cooling hole under thermal cycling were tracked and analyzed. In order to clarify the deformation mechanism of the cooling hole and the feasibility of theoretical analysis, the finite element analysis was carried out by using the material parameters measured experimentally. 2. ANALYTICAL SOLUTION A 3-layer theoretical model for the hole deformation distribution was derived using a method similar to that reported by Li et al.,25 i.e., first, the TGO growth and thermal deformation were allowed to occur unconstrained, and then the required traction pressure was applied to ensure the continuity of displacement and traction. Figure 1 shows the schematic diagram of the derivation process. In the figure, pi and po are the internal and external pressure of the TGO, respectively. TBC and TGO were thin cylindrical shells with initial thickness h1 and h2, with the radii of R1 and R2 (0.5 mm) mounted on infinite metal substrates with a hole. The substrate and the TGO layer were assumed to be elastic and perfectly plastic, and their yield strengths varied with temperature. TBC was assumed to be perfectly elastic. The mathematical details are shown below. One cycle consists of TGO growth, cooling, and reheating (Figure 2). TGO growth occurs at the maximum temperature To and the system is driven by the TGO growth strain εg. The TGO growth will not occur during the steps of cooling and reheating; instead, the system is driven by the CTE mismatch between the substrate, TGO, and TBC. In order to constitute the complete thermal history, the following four combinations are required: (a) the TBC, TGO, and the substrate deformed elastically; (b) TGO remains elastic while the substrate is plastic; and (c) vice versa; (d) TGO and the substrate deformed plastically. First, when TBC, TGO, and the substrate have elastic responses, the strain and stress in TBC, TGO, and the substrate are as follows based on the internal and external pressure solutions of the hollow cylinder in the plane stress condition:28 = _ p rr TBC i (1) = + _ p R R h h R h h 2 2 2 TBC i 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 2 (2) = _ p rr TGO o (3) = _ R h p p ( ) TGO 2 2 i o (4) = _ p rr sub o (5) = _ p sub o (6) = _ M G 2 TBC TBC (7) = _ R E h p p ( ) TGO 2 2 TGO 2 i o (8) = _ p G 2 sub o sub (9) Here, = + + ( ) ( ) M 1 v v R h R R h R 1 1 2 2 TBC TBC 1 1 1 1 1 1 (10) Figure 2. Temperature history for typical thermal cycles. Figure 3. Determination of the actual strain (a) during TGO growth and (b) during cooling or reheating. ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Article https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.3c00307 ACS Omega 2023, 8, 13048−13058 13050

[PAGE 4] where, σ and ε are the stress and strain, respectively. The subscripts rr and θθ denote the radial and hoop direction, respectively. Because of the difference of deformations in the processes of TGO growth and reheating (or cooling), the calculations of pi and po are as follows: Dwelling at the maximum temperature, = + p M G G R E h R E h 1 1 2 i g TBC sub 2 TGO 2 2 TGO 2 1 Ä Ç ÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅ i k jjjjj y { zzzzz É Ö ÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ (11) = p pM G G o i sub TBC (12) During heating or cooling, = + + p T G T R E h M G R E h MG G ( ) 2 ( ) 1 i TBC TGO sub sub TBC 2 TGO 2 TBC 2 TGO 2 sub TBC 1 Ä Ç ÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅ É Ö ÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ Ä Ç ÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅ i k jjjjj y { zzzzz É Ö ÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ (13) = p pM G G G T 2 ( ) o i sub TBC sub sub TBC (14) where G, E, v, and α are the shear modulus, Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio, and CTE, respectively. The subscripts sub, TBC, and TGO denote the substrate, TBC, and TGO layers, respectively. Here, depending on the segment of the thermal history (cooling/reheating or the TGO growth), the actual hoop strains occurring in the processes of TGO growth and cooling/reheating are different from each other. Figure 3 illustrates the schematics. Namely, the actual hoop strain during the TGO growth is the same as that given by eqs 7 and 9, whereas the strain during cooling/reheating is εα_sub − εθθ_sub, εα_TGO + εθθ_TGO, or εα_TBC −εθθ_TBC. Here, εα is the strain caused by the temperature change. The Mises yield criterion was applied to the yield conditions of the TGO layer and the substrate. First, it is assumed that when the TGO layer yields, the external and internal pressures remain constant, so the stress or strain in TBC, TGO, or the substrate remains constant. Second, when an area near the hole on the substrate is in the yield state, plastic deformation occurs in this area, i.e., that in R ≤r ≤RP (where RP is the plastic radius). According to Kaliszky,29 Rp versus the external pressure and Rp versus εθθ_sub are related by eqs 15 and 16: = + p R R 1 3 1 2ln o p 2 Y sub i k jjjjj y { zzzzz (15) = + _ v R R v R R 2 3 (5 4 ) 3(1 2 ) 1 2ln sub Y sub sub p 2 2 sub p 2 Ä Ç ÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅ i k jjjjj y { zzzzz i k jjjjj y { zzzzz É Ö ÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ (16) where εY sub and σY sub are the yield strain and stress of the substrate, respectively. In addition, εY sub = σY sub/Esub. Because the TGO layer is still elastic, the strain and stress in the TGO layer can be obtained by substituting eq 15 into eqs 3∼5 and 8. According to Figure 3b, the relationship between the hoop strain and terminal expansion in TBC, TGO, and the substrate is as follows. + = _ _ T( ) TGO TBC TBC TGO (17) + = _ _ T( ) sub TGO sub TGO (18) Since the internal pressure can be calculated by substituting eqs 7, 8, 15, 16 into 17 and 18, = + p T v R R v R R M ( ) 2 3 (5 4 ) 3(1 2 ) 1 2ln / i sub TBC Y sub sub p 2 2 sub p 2 Ä Ç ÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅ Ä Ç ÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅ i k jjjjj y { zzzzz i k jjjjj y { zzzzz É Ö ÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ É Ö ÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ When the pressure reaches the yield condition of TGO, pressure is assumed to remain constant. 3. MATERIAL PROPERTIES The properties of elastic materials are the same as those reported in the study of Li et al.,25,30 and they are listed in Table 1. Regardless of the temperature, these properties are assumed to be constant. As shown in Figure 4, the yield strengths of TGO and the substrate are the functions of the temperature. The TBC layer is assumed to be perfectly elastic. Because TGO is a brittle material, the compressive strength and tensile strength are different and depend on the temperature. Namely, under tension (Figure 4a), the TGO yield strength is σY sub = 260 MPa up to 900 °C, and σY sub = 70 MPa at 1200 °C. Under compression (Figure 4b), the TGO yield strength is σY sub = −2600 MPa up to 900 °C, and σY sub = 1000 MPa at 1200 °C, which was measured in house.31 In the middle temperature range, the yield stress decreases linearly with temperature. For the substrate (Figure 4c), the yield strength up to 300 °C is σY sub = 200 MPa, and the yield strength is σY sub = 7.6 MPa at the temperature above 900 °C, which was also measured in house.31 The yield stress decreases linearly with the temperature in the middle temperature range. The TGO growth strain, including the lateral and thickness growth strain, was measured from the author’s previous study.32 Figure 5 shows the variation of h2 and the lateral growth strain. 4. ANALYTICAL RESULTS Figure 6a shows the strain variation at the interface, εθθ, and the lower line in Figure 6b shows the stress variation in the TGO layer, σθθ_TGO, according to the initial four thermal cycles. In the first cycle, there are six stages. (1) Initially, TBC and the substrate respond elastically to the TGO growth in the lateral direction, and eqs 11 and 12 Table 1. Material Properties of the TBC, TGO Layer, and Substrate material Young’s modulus, E Poisson’s ratio, v thermal expansion coefficient, α TBC 100 GPa 0.25 12 × 10−6/°C TGO 390 GPa 0.25 6 × 10−6/°C substrate 140 GPa 0.25 12 × 10−6/°C ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Article https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.3c00307 ACS Omega 2023, 8, 13048−13058 13051

[PAGE 5] can be applied until the substrate or the TGO layer begins to yield. (2) Under continuing to let the TGO growth yield first, pi and po remain constant; consequently, the strains or stresses in TBC, TGO, and the substrate remained constant according to eqs 1−9. During cooling and reheating, the following four stages occur. (3) With the decrease of temperature, the yield strength of TGO increases according to Figure 4b, and the TGO layer responds elastically. (4) After the temperature drops to 900 °C, TGO becomes constant, and the yield strength of the substrate increases until the temperature drops to 300 °C. Therefore, the TGO layer yields at a certain temperature around 400 °C, and pi and po remain constant. The stresses in TBC, TGO, and the substrate remain constant according to eqs 1−9, whereas the strain is given by the sum of strains caused by pure thermal shrinkage. (5) During heating up, the thermal expansion mismatch is reduced and the substrate as well as TGO respond elastically (reversed yield in the substrate was neglected). Eqs 11 and 12 were applied. (6) When heating up to over a certain temperature, tensile stress occurs in the TGO layer due to the compressive plastic deformation of TGO in the previous cooling step. Because the tensile strength of TGO is much smaller than the compressive strength, TGO is prone to tensile Figure 4. Variation of yield strengths with temperature of (a) TGO under tension, (b) TGO under compression, and (c) substrate. Figure 5. (a) Variation of TGO thickness with oxidation time at 1200 °C, (b) variation of the lateral growth strain of TGO with cycles and the TGO thickness. ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Article https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.3c00307 ACS Omega 2023, 8, 13048−13058 13052

[PAGE 6] yield in this stage, and the interfacial pressure remains constant after tensile yield. The strain is given by the sum of the strains caused by the pure thermal expansion. In the following cycles, the TGO layer does not yield again during the TGO growth. (7) However, due to the increase of the TGO thickness, the substrate near the hole starts to yield from the second cycle. The pressure in the interface increases with the plastic region defined by RP expansion. Eqs 15 and 16 were applied. The yield conditions of TGO, the substrate, and TBC at each stage are shown in Table 2. As shown in Figure 6b, the compressive stress level in TGO in which the substrate begins to yield decreases with the thermal cycles. The maximum and minimum stresses of the TGO layer are determined by the tensile strength and compressive strength of TGO. Therefore, regardless of the number of cycles, the maximum and minimum levels are constant. On the other hand, as shown in Figure 6a, the minimum and maximum hoop strain levels at the interface nearly have no changes according to the sequence of the four cycles. This result is quite different from the previous result of the original two-layer analytical model consisting of only the TGO layer and the substrate.25 As shown in Figure 7, under the condition that the material properties of the substrate and TGO layer are the same, the hoop strain in the two-layer model increases with the cycles elapsed. However, TBC obviously suppressed the hoop strain in the three-layer model. In order to prove the feasibility of the 3-layer model, the following analysis proceeded. With the same condition of the material properties of TGO and the substrate, as long as TBC has no constraint on the other two layers during thermal cycling, it can be the same as the two-layer model. That is, the elastic modulus of the TBC approach is set to zero, and the CTE is set to the same value as TGO. In this way, TBC will expand or contract together with TGO and will not have a constraint on the next layer. The hoop strain comparison results with modified properties are shown in Figure 7. As shown in the figure, the hoop strain was exactly the same during the first cycle, and there was a slight difference in the stage of the TGO yield compression from the second cycle. Because according to eq 10, the thickness of TBC can only be set to tend to zero and cannot be zero. In a word, the modified three-layer model can be used to predict the deformation trend in the TBC system, and the hoop strain comparison results of the modified 3-layer model and the 2-layer model also prove the feasibility of the 3-layer model in this study. Figure 6. Analytical results of the first four thermal cycling; (a) variations of the hoop strain at the interface and (b) variation of the TGO stress (H-heating; C-cooling; G-TGO growth). Table 2. Yield of TGO, Substrate, and TBC at Each Stage stages 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 steps TGO growth TGO growth cooling cooling heating heating cooling TGO elastic yield-compression elastic yield-compression elastic yield-tension. elastic substrate elastic elastic elastic elastic elastic elastic yield TBC elastic elastic elastic elastic elastic elastic elastic Figure 7. 3-Layer analytical results compared with 2-layer results during the first four thermal cycling. ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Article https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.3c00307 ACS Omega 2023, 8, 13048−13058 13053