[PAGE 1] Short Communication Additive friction stir deposition of multi-layer aluminum-silicon carbide metal matrix composites Robert C. Pack a,#, John W. Bohling a,#, Joshua Kincaid a, Abrian Abir a, Tony Schmitz a, Brett G. Compton a,b,* a Mechanical, Aerospace, and Biomedical Engineering Department, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA b Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Additive friction stir deposition Metal matrix composites Additive manufacturing Aluminum Silicon carbide Particle size Hardness A B S T R A C T Aluminum metal matrix composites (MMCs) possess good strength and stiffness combined with low density, making them attractive in a variety of applications. Additive friction stir deposition (AFSD) is a relatively new, solid state metal additive manufacturing process that has high potential as a forming route for MMCs of complex shape. However, little work has been done to investigate how AFSD affects microstructure and properties of conventional MMCs. In this work, aluminum-silicon carbide (Al-SiC) MMC extruded plate was used as feedstock for AFSD to create a five-layer deposit of an Al-SiC MMC for characterization. Microstructure, particle size distribution, and hardness were evaluated in the as-deposited condition while hardness recovery was investi­ gated with post-deposition solution and aging heat treatments. The deposited MMC revealed complex, macro­ scale mixing behavior, mild fragmentation of the SiC particles, and uniform particle size distribution and dispersion across MMC regions of the deposit. Solution and aging heat treatment restored the hardness of the deposited MMC to that of the as-received feedstock. This work suggests AFSD is a promising route for producing complex MMC parts with similar or better properties to those produced by traditional processes. 1. Introduction Aluminum (Al) metal matrix composites (MMCs) enable a combi­ nation of low density and moderate ductility, imparted by the Al matrix, and high strength, stiffness, and wear resistance, imparted by ceramic reinforcements [1–6]. Due to these advantageous properties, Al MMCs are well suited to automotive, aerospace, energy, and defense applica­ tions, which have growing needs for high performance, lightweight materials [2]. The need for large, high-quality components with com­ plex geometries has driven interest in additive manufacturing (AM) of MMCs. AM comprises many different technologies that create compo­ nents through incremental addition of material, enabling fabrication of architectures and composite compositions that may be unattainable via conventional methods, while also reducing energy and material use in some applications [7,8]. Fusion-based AM processes, such as laser powder bed fusion (LPBF), have demonstrated successful deposition of MMCs [9,10], but the melting of the matrix followed by rapid solidifi­ cation can cause detrimental reactions and poor bonding or porosity between the matrix and reinforcement particles [5,11–13]. In contrast to fusion-based AM, additive friction stir deposition (AFSD) is a solid-state, large-area, metal AM process that creates layer-by-layer deposits at temperatures below the solidus temperature [14,15], thus eliminating the challenges associated with melting of the matrix. During AFSD, a feedstock rod is fed through a channel in a rotating tool. As the feedstock makes initial contact with a stationary substrate, frictional heating ele­ vates the feedstock temperature to 60–90 % of the metal melting tem­ perature [16], leading to thermal softening and plastic deformation. Plastic deformation of the feedstock and substrate then promotes solid-state bonding. Continued feeding of material combined with sub­ sequent motion of the rotating tool allows deposition of layers to build 3D parts. AFSD has been used successfully for several Al alloys [17–22], yet work in AFSD of MMCs is still in its infancy, warranting further study. Recently, studies on fabrication of MMCs via AFSD have mainly focused on utilizing powder-based feedstocks in the form of a continuously-fed mixture of matrix and reinforcement powders [5], a solid metal * Corresponding author. E-mail address: brettcompton@utk.edu (B.G. Compton). # Contributed equally to this work. Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Additive Manufacturing Letters journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/addlet https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addlet.2025.100330 Received 24 June 2025; Received in revised form 14 September 2025; Accepted 3 October 2025 Additive Manufacturing Letters 15 (2025) 100330 Available online 4 October 2025 2772-3690/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- nc/4.0/ ).

[PAGE 2] matrix rod partially filled with reinforcement powder [23–25], or a hollow feed rod filled with Al and reinforcement powder [26]. Indeed, these routes demonstrate exciting potential to create MMCs in situ, but studies to-date have shown difficulty in achieving a uniform micro­ structure. Research utilizing a solid MMC feedstock is limited but has shown to promote uniform particle dispersion within deposits [27]. One aspect open for investigation is understanding the AFSD processing ef­ fects on the resultant micro- and macrostructure in MMCs. Of interest is the reduction in reinforcement particle size due to shear deformation imparted by the rotating tool. Previous studies [24,28,29] have reported observing attrition of nano-, intermetallic, and constitutive particles in AFSD deposits, but these studies were limited to low loadings (<5 vol. %) and/or single layer builds, leaving the behavior of highly loaded, multi-layer MMCs unstudied. Current studies have also mainly focused on MMC properties in the as-deposited condition, warranting further investigation of heat-treatment response. This study investigated how the AFSD process influences micro­ structure, particle size and dispersion, and mechanical properties of an Al MMC after deposition using a commercial, solid, Al-SiC MMC feed­ stock in which particles are evenly distributed throughout the matrix. Using this feedstock, multi-layer MMCs were deposited onto a 6061 Al substrate, characterized using optical microscopy and image analysis, and compared to the original MMC feedstock. Specific consideration was given to the microstructure and particle size distribution at multiple locations to identify how material flow during deposition impacts the uniformity of an MMC deposit. Vickers hardness measurements were used to investigate the spatial uniformity of the deposited MMC and the final achievable properties by comparing hardness of the as-received feedstock to the hardness of the deposit before and after a solution and aging heat treatment. To the authors’ knowledge, this work shows for the first time that multi-layer AFSD of commercial MMC results in macro-scale microstructural heterogeneity that persist through multiple layers, and that post-deposition heat treatment can be used on AFSD- deposited MMC to recover or exceed the Vickers hardness of the feed­ stock MMC subjected to the same heat treatment. Insights and under­ standing gained through this work can be applied to other MMC systems and may enable greater utilization of MMCs through AFSD. 2. Method and materials 2.1. Commercial MMC feedstock preparation and AFSD process Al-SiC MMC plate (DWA Aluminum Composites USA, Chatsworth, CA) was purchased as feedstock for AFSD experiments. This material consists of an aluminum 6092 matrix reinforced with 25 vol % SiC particles (6092/SiC) and is heat treated to a T6 condition in the as- received state. The plate had cross-section dimensions of 127 mm wide by 12.7 mm thick. To meet the dimensional requirements for AFSD feedstock, rods measuring 9.5 mm × 9.5 mm × 200 mm were fabricated from the plate by waterjet and conventional machining. A piece of 6061- T651 aluminum measuring approximately 300 mm × 300 mm × 13 mm was used as the base plate for additive friction stir deposition. AFSD was performed with a MELD L3 machine (MELD Manufacturing Corporation, Christiansburg VA, USA) using a tool with four teardrop protrusions (2.29 mm in height) on the tool face to pro­ mote material flow and mixing. Graphite was utilized as lubricant for insertion of the MMC feedstock rod into the tool. In AFSD, once loaded, the tool is rotated until a target speed is attained, and the tool is lowered into the substrate to a predetermined height, corresponding to the desired initial layer height. The feedstock rod is then pushed out by the actuator at a programmed feed rate; once the rod contacts the substrate, frictional heating and compressive force cause the material to yield and flow out from underneath the tool. Once yielding is observed, a G-code print path is initiated to control the machine movement and deposit the feedstock onto the base plate (Fig. 1). Deposition of the MMC feedstock was performed using parameters derived from known successful parameters for Al 6061 (Table 1). The initial deposition parameters were then manually adjusted based on temperature feedback from a thermocouple embedded in the tool (located 0.508 mm from the tool face), the machine torque limits, and visual inspection of the deposit. Machine parameters deemed successful resulted in tool temperatures between 520 and 550 ◦C during deposition (Fig. S1). Preliminary screening deposits of the MMC feedstock revealed issues with roughness and poor surface appearance when deposited directly onto a 6061-T6 base plate (Fig. S2). Appearance improved when the MMC was deposited onto a preceding AFSD underlayer of 6061, so this approach was used for deposition in the current work. A five-layer deposit was produced (Fig. 1), consisting of a deposited Al 6061 underlayer followed by four layers of deposited 6092/SiC MMC; each layer had a nominal thickness of 1 mm. 2.2. Optical microscopy and particle analysis After deposition, cross-sectional samples were extracted from the deposit and base plate using waterjet machining, then mounted in epoxy Fig. 1. Schematic of the additive friction stir deposition using solid MMC feedstock. Table 1 Deposition parameters for 5-layer MMC deposit. Parameter Description Traverse direction Unidirectional for 6061 underlayer, Layer 1 Alternating directions for MMC layers, Layers 2–5 Traverse feed rate (TFR) 2.1 mm/s [5 in/min] for Layer 1 1.7 mm/s [4 in/min] for Layers 2–5 Material feed rate (MFR) 2.0 mm/s [4.75 in/min] for Layer 1 1.7 mm/s [4 in/min] for Layers 2–5 Spindle rotation rate 200 rpm for Layer 1 180 rpm for Layer 2 160 rpm for Layers 3–5 Base plate temperature control None Deposition control mode Spindle speed Deposition layer height, nominal 1.02 mm [0.04 in] Tool design Four teardrop protrusions, 2.29 mm [0.09 in] height Penetration of protrusions into substrate 1.27 mm [0.05 in] Lubricant Graphite spray applied manually R.C. Pack et al. Additive Manufacturing Letters 15 (2025) 100330 2

[PAGE 3] and polished for optical microscopy. The following preparation pro­ cedure was used: grinding with 30 μm and 15 μm diamond lapping film; rough polishing with 9 μm diamond suspension and Gold Label cloth, 3 μm diamond suspension and Final A cloth; followed by polishing with Final A cloth and 0.04 μm colloidal silica suspension. All grinding and polishing supplies were obtained from Allied High Tech Products, Inc., Cerritos, CA. Polishing times were typically 5 min for diamond polishing steps and 20–25 min for the final polishing with the silica suspension. Between each polishing step, samples were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath (1.9-L Ultrasonic Bath, Fisher Scientific) in denatured ethanol for one minute, then rinsed with ethanol and dried in warm air. Microscopy was performed using a Keyence VHX-5000 digital microscope (Keyence Corporation of America, Itasca, IL) to obtain low magnification images of the entire deposit. Higher magnification images were obtained with a Nikon MA-200 inverted microscope (Nikon Metrology, Inc., Brighton, MI) for microstructure and particle analysis with FIJI/ImageJ [30]. Micrographs for particle analysis of the MMC feedstock and the AFSD MMC deposit were obtained in the as-polished condition with bright-field imaging. Acquisition settings (light source intensity, aper­ ture, exposure time, camera gain, contrast, camera resolution) were held constant. Micrographs were obtained at 1000X (4067 × 3116 pixels; 0.031µm/pixel) at multiple locations across the width and thickness of the deposit to represent regions of the deposit with different material flow; micrographs were also obtained from the as-received MMC feed­ stock for comparison. Micrographs were subsequently analyzed with FIJI/ImageJ [30] to determine particle size and orientation distributions for the MMC feedstock and multiple regions within the MMC deposit. Micrographs were imported into FIJI/ImageJ and the enhance contrast feature was applied with default settings (0.35 % saturated pixels). Images were then converted to 8-bit and processed with manual thresholding to segment particles. After thresholding, the converted black and white micrographs were checked against the original micrographs to ensure particle edges were not influenced by the thresholding operation, and contacting particles were manually separated where needed by individual white pixels. Particle analysis was performed with FIJI/ImageJ [30] to mea­ sure particle area and equivalent diameter; a lower threshold of 0.01 µm2 was implemented for particle counting and a bin size of 0.15 µm was used. Particles touching the edge of the image were excluded from analysis. From this data, particle size distribution curves were plotted and descriptive statistics (d90, d50, d10, span1) were calculated. Addi­ tionally, particle orientation was measured for those particles having circularity <0.7 by fitting an ellipse to their outlines and recording the orientation of the major axis of the ellipse relative to horizontal. Cor­ responding particle analysis was performed using micrographs from the 6092 Al/SiC MMC feedstock for comparison to the MMC deposit. Four micrographs from different regions of the feedstock were analyzed (comprising 3947 particles in total) and twelve micrographs from different regions were analyzed for the deposited material (comprising 24,781 particles in total). 2.3. Heat treatment and hardness measurements Hardness measurements and heat treatments were conducted to investigate the mechanical properties of the as-received and as- deposited MMC. A sample was cut from the MMC deposit by waterjet machining for solution treatment and aging to the T6 condition to compare with the T6 6092 Al/SiC MMC feedstock. To eliminate possible variances between the manufacturer and laboratory heat treatment, a section of T6 6092 Al/SiC MMC feedstock was heat treated with the MMC deposit sample to serve as a baseline. Heat treatment parameters for solution treatment and T6 aging were obtained from the supplier (DWA Aluminum Composites USA, Chatsworth, CA). The parameters corresponded to the original processing of the purchased 6092 Al/SiC T6 MMC and are listed in Table 2. Solution and aging treatments were performed in air with temperature history recorded by a thermocouple to verify compliance with the stated temperature ranges. Heat treatment time was started when the sample temperature reached the lower limit of the stated range. After quenching in water from the solution tem­ perature, the aging treatment was initiated within 15 min. Following the aging treatment, the samples were quenched in water and then mounted and polished following the procedure listed above to remove surface oxidation and provide equivalent surfaces for microscopy and micro­ hardness measurements. Hardness values were measured for the 6092 Al/SiC MMC feedstock (re-heat treated T6), as-deposited MMC, and solution treated and aged MMC deposit using a Wilson-Rockwell Vickers tester with a load of 0.5 kgf (HV 0.5) and dwell time of 10 s. Hardness values for the re-heat treated MMC feedstock were similar to the as- received feedstock, so the as-received feedstock hardness was consid­ ered equivalent and used for comparison with the MMC deposit. Indentation diagonal lengths ranged from ~60 to 150 µm, sufficiently large to encompass many SiC particles (d50 ~3 µm, d90 ~6.5 µm) and provide hardness values that are representative of the bulk material. Hardness measurements were conducted along three vertical traces through the thickness of the samples at a spacing of one indentation per 0.5 mm. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. AFSD of multi-layer Al-SiC MMC Additive friction stir deposition utilizing an MMC feedstock was successful in producing a multi-layer deposit (Fig. 2) wherein deposition of MMC layers was achieved not only onto unreinforced aluminum (layer 2 onto layer 1, Fig. 1) but also onto multiple previously deposited MMC layers (Layers 3 to 5). Established AFSD parameters for unrein­ forced 6061 aluminum were utilized for initial deposition, and then modified to achieve successful MMC deposition, suggesting established base metal parameters may serve as a good starting point for parameter development with other MMC systems. Compared to Al 6061, intro­ duction of SiC reinforcements into the matrix decreases ductility [31] and increases resistance to flow and plastic deformation, which, in turn, increases frictional heat generation [5]. The spindle rate in the first MMC layer (layer 2) was decreased from 200 to 180 rpm to keep the tool temperature below the solidus temperature of the base alloy. Buildup of heat from previous layers, coupled with deposition onto previously deposited MMC layers, required further reduction to 160 rpm for layers 3 to 5. Material feed rate and transverse feed rate were reduced to keep spindle torque and actuator force within machine limits while providing the desired volume of deposition. Looking at the top surface of layer 5, a rough appearance (Fig. 2a) is evident, in contrast to the relatively smooth surface of typical 6061 AFSD deposits (Fig. 2b) [19]. Differences in deposit appearance are emphasized in Fig. 2b Shiny surfaces are present at the terminal point, where the tool lifts off, while a rough and dull surface with many dis­ continuities or jagged features is seen in the MMC deposit. Since the contact behavior between the tool and the deposited material is related to the friction condition (full slip or slip/stick) and heat generation [16], Table 2 Solution and artificial aging heat treatments. Treatment Parameters Solution treatment 554 ◦C ± 5 ◦C for 3 ± 0.5 h Quench Cold water (~25 ◦C) Artificial aging treatment 163 ◦C ± 5 ◦C for 7.5 ± 0.5 h 1 Span = (d90 - d10)/d50, where dX is the location in the particle size dis­ tribution below which X% of the particles are contained. For example, a d90 value of 4 µm would indicate that 90% of the particles in the distribution have diameter of 4 µm or less. R.C. Pack et al. Additive Manufacturing Letters 15 (2025) 100330 3

[PAGE 4] it is believed differences in interfacial contact and heat generation causes the different surface textures and appearances. Deposition flash produced by excess feed material exiting from under the tool was pre­ sent around most of the deposit. Further optimization of machine pa­ rameters (Table 1) is expected to reduce the amount of flash present and enable production of higher quality MMC deposits. Nonetheless, the successful deposition of the multilayer MMC is among the first reported and demonstrates feasibility in utilizing a commercially available MMC feedstock for AFSD of MMCs. 3.2. Macrostructure of AFSD MMC deposit Representative cross-sections of the multi-layer MMC deposit, in the X-Z plane, are shown in Fig. 2c and Fig. 3a. The MMC deposit appears darker in comparison to the light Al matrix (Fig. 3c), with areas of higher SiC particle density having a darker appearance. In Fig. 3a, there is no evidence of any macroscopic cracks, fractures, pores, or delamination within the deposit, indicating good bonding between deposit and sub­ strate (dashed line) and between deposited layers. Aside from a visible boundary between 6061 and MMC regions, boundaries between layers are not clearly discernable. The deposit cross-section differs significantly from what may be ex­ pected from simple stacking of layers, indicating the presence of com­ plex flow and mixing behavior. Significant unreinforced aluminum at the outer edges suggests the Al 6061 underlayer was pushed to the sides by deposition of the MMC, and there is a prominent central core feature that consists of unreinforced aluminum topped with thin swirl features traversing multiple layers. Trough-like features flanking the central core seen at the Al 6061–MMC boundary are attributed to interaction of the tool protrusions with the substrate and deposited material [32]. The formation of the central core area of unreinforced aluminum is notable in that it starkly contrasts with observations of single-material deposits (e.g., Al on Al), which exhibit a bowl-shaped interface between the de­ posit and baseplate [32]. Additionally, the shape of the central core and associated swirl features exhibit minor variation along the deposit length, as seen when comparing cross-sections A-A and B-B in Fig. 2c. It is noted, though, that the central core only persists for 1–2 layers in the deposit and the swirl features above that continue to decrease in size with distance from the baseplate (Fig. 3). The top layer region (~1 mm) in the deposit exhibits a near homogenous macrostructure. These ob­ servations suggest the transition region between substrate and deposit may only persist for a few layers, above which deposition of bulk MMC with uniform macrostructure may be possible. This unusual behavior is attributed to the difference in flow stress between the weaker 6061 and the stronger MMC. The yield strength ratio of the MMC feedstock (448 MPa) to 6061-T6 aluminum (276 MPa) is 1.6:1 [33] and may be larger at deposition temperatures since the 6061 underlayer is in a hot worked (-F) condition rather than the strengthened -T6 condition. Also, depo­ sition parameters were programmed with ~50 % penetration of the tool protrusions into the previous layer (1.27 mm penetration depth, out of 2.3 mm protrusion height), imparting significant interaction and mixing between successive layers. It is not clear at present whether this het­ erogeneous microstructure is favorable or not, but mechanical inter­ locking and compositional grading at interfaces between dissimilar materials are proven approaches to increase interfacial toughness [34–37]. 3.3. Microstructure and particle analysis of AFSD MMC deposit A comparison of the microstructures of the feedstock MMC and as- deposited MMC is shown in Fig. 3c. SiC particles display an irregular morphology in both the feedstock and after deposition, and a similar uniform distribution of particles is seen in both. However, after AFSD, higher numbers of small SiC particles dispersed in the aluminum pockets in between the larger SiC particles are clearly visible (highlighted by the red circles in Fig. 3c). This observation suggests that the AFSD process causes some fragmentation of the SiC particles that results in a higher number of small particles in the AFSD MMC compared to the as-received material. Optical micrographs at select locations throughout the height and width of the cross section display similar microstructures in each location within the MMC deposit (Fig. 4). These micrographs reveal an absence of any systematic qualitative variation in particle size or Fig. 2. (a) Top-down view of the five-layer deposit using solid MMC feedstock. Tool traverse direction for the 6061 underlayer 1 and Al-SiC MMC layers 2–5 are shown with arrows on left. Counter-clockwise rotation of the tool is depicted by the white arrow; white dashed lines A-A and B-B indicate sample locations for metallography and heat treatment. (b) Track termination area for a plain 6061 deposit and the final layer 5 of the MMC deposit. Note the rough surface appearance for the MMC deposit. (c) Transverse sections A-A and B-B, showing macrostructure where light and dark areas correspond to plain aluminum and MMC regions, respectively. R.C. Pack et al. Additive Manufacturing Letters 15 (2025) 100330 4

[PAGE 5] dispersion within the deposit, either proceeding from the bottom to the top of the deposit (I to IV) or across the deposit from left to right. No microscopic pores or voids are apparent in these regions. Representative images for each step of the image analysis are shown for reference in Figure S3. Image analysis corroborates the qualitative observations described above: in the MMC feedstock, the number den­ sity of particles was observed to be 0.081 particles/µm2 (3947 particles over an area of 48,714 µm2), whereas in the AFSD deposit the observed number density of particles was 0.1696 particles/µm2 (24,781 particles over an area of 164,142 µm2), roughly double that of the feedstock material. Further particle size analysis was performed on micrographs throughout the deposit (Fig. 4) and in the feedstock utilizing area- weighted analysis, as area weighting provides a stronger correlation to mechanical properties than particle size analysis based on number of particles alone [38]. Particle diameter (d), calculated as the equivalent area diameter, was determined for comparison. The probability distri­ bution and cumulative distribution for the AFSD deposit and feedstock are shown in Fig. 5a on the left and right axis, respectively. Both ma­ terials show a unimodal distribution of SiC particle size, but the distri­ bution in the feedstock material is skewed toward larger sizes, exhibiting a larger most probable particle size (mode) at 2.9 µm versus 2.1 µm equivalent diameter for the AFSD deposit. The feedstock material also displays a higher occurrence of very large particles greater than ~8 µm in diameter. The cumulative distributions also highlight that the deposited ma­ terial contains a higher volume of particles having effective diameter less than ~4 µm, reflected in d50 values [39] of 2.93 µm for the deposit compared to 3.35 µm for the feedstock. This observed reduction in particle size is believed to be caused by the large amount of shear deformation during deposition [24]. However, identification of the exact mechanisms controlling changes in ceramic particle size during AFSD of MMCs requires further study. Analysis of the particle orientation distributions (POD) show that there is mild particle orientation at the edges of the extruded feedstock bar (Fig. S4a) and no particle orientation in the central region of the feedstock bar (Fig.S4b). In contrast, there is pronounced particle orientation in the AFSD-deposited material in all regions investigated (Fig. S5). The most probable particle orientation falls within the range of θ = −9◦to 9◦for regions on the right side of the deposit (right column in Fig. 4 and S5). In the central portion of the deposit (central column in Fig. 4 and S5), the most probable particle orientation falls within the range of θ = −27◦to 0◦, except for the bottom region, which displays less orientation overall and a most probable range of θ = 0◦to 27◦On the left side of the deposit (left column in Fig. 4 and S5), the most probable Fig. 3. Macrostructure and microstructure of feedstock and deposited MMCs. Cross-section macrographs of (a) section A-A as deposited and (b) section B-B from the after T6 solution treatment and artificial aging. (c) Optical micrographs of the feedstock MMC (left) and the as-deposited MMC (right). Dark gray particles correspond to SiC. A higher density of fine particles can be seen in the deposited MMC than in the feedstock, as shown in areas denoted by red circles. R.C. Pack et al. Additive Manufacturing Letters 15 (2025) 100330 5

[PAGE 6] particle orientation falls within the range of θ = −36◦to −9◦These measurements suggest that AFSD-deposited MMCs are likely to possess anisotropic properties when non-spherical particles are present and that the location within the deposit is likely to influence the preferred par­ ticle orientation. Unfortunately, the fact that the deposit was made using a back-and-forth raster precludes direct association of particle orienta­ tion with the advancing or retreating side of the deposit. In a multi-layer build, mixing can occur over multiple layers, evi­ denced by penetration of the MMC region down below the sub­ strate–underlayer interface (Fig. 3a), and the welling up of a central core of material devoid of SiC particles. Because the lower layers would be mixed with unfilled 6061 aluminum, it was initially expected that the concentration of SiC particles in ASFD-deposited MMC might vary with the height of the deposit. If this were the case, a corresponding gradient in particle size may be expected in the deposit, due to higher particle attrition rates with higher particle concentration. Thus, particle size analysis was also conducted on specific locations within the deposit. Fig. 5b depicts cumulative particle size distributions as a function of height in the build, moving from bottom (near the build plate, location I) to top (location IV). Surprisingly, no distinct differences can be identi­ fied between the particle size distributions as a function of height. This observation implies that the MMC does not seamlessly mix with, and become diluted by, the unfilled substrate material during deposition, and nor do the conditions leading to particle attrition change Fig. 4. Optical micrographs obtained through the thickness (z-direction) at the left, center, and right locations in the as-deposited multi-layer MMC, corresponding to the colored dots in Fig. 3a. Row I to Row IV proceeds in the positive z-direction, from the base plate (I) toward the top AFSD layer 5 (IV) in the deposit. Note swirl features in the deposit were avoided. The micrographs show that particle characteristics are uniform across x- and z-directions within the deposit. R.C. Pack et al. Additive Manufacturing Letters 15 (2025) 100330 6