[PAGE 1] Vol.:(0123456789) SN Applied Sciences (2020) 2:1589 | https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-03327-4 Research Article Burst mode versus single‑pulse machining for Bessel beam micro‑drilling of thin glass: study and comparison V. V. Belloni1 · V. Sabonis2 · P. Di Trapani1 · O. Jedrkiewicz3 Received: 13 May 2020 / Accepted: 12 August 2020 / Published online: 29 August 2020 © Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 Abstract We present a study on the micro-drilling process by means of a picosecond Bessel–Gauss beam, and the achievements obtained on a 200-µm-thick AF32 glass sample in different laser fabrication regimes. In particular, we compare the results and morphology of the holes generated with a high-repetition-rate pulsed laser, respectively, in the single-pulse mode and in the burst mode machining regimes. We highlight the advantages or drawbacks of these two types of microfabrica- tion for the generation of through-holes. For a given pulse density, the burst mode turns out to be advantageous with respect to the single-pulse mode fabrication in terms of lower energy per pulse needed and higher speed of drilling, even if the stronger thermal effects can more easily lead to surface cracks. On the other hand, by adjusting the pulse density below a critical level, it can be shown that the single-pulse regime can be adopted for the generation of more regular through-holes and cleaner apertures, even if multiple pass operation is likely to be needed. Keywords Laser fabrication · Micro-hole drilling · Single-pulse machining · Burst mode machining · Bessel beams 1 Introduction Processing of materials by ultrashort laser pulses has undergone a fast evolution over the last decade, and ultrafast laser systems have been widely applied in many scientific and industrial fields [1, 2]. In particular, the laser microfabrication of dielectrics takes advantage of the interaction of ultrashort high-intensity pulses with the material to generate 2D and 3D structures in the processed sample. It relies on the strong nonlinear absorption pro- cess of energy taking place only in the highly localized focus of the beam, and enabling a structural modification such as a refractive index change or the creation of voids and ablations inside the material, with very high precision [3]. The advantage of using femtosecond or picosecond laser sources lies indeed in the ability to deposit energy into the material before thermal diffusion occurs, resulting in the reduction of heat-affected zones [4]. Due to the industrial demand for high-throughput laser process, major efforts have been recently addressed to the development of ultrafast laser sources with increasing average powers and repetition rates. Nowadays, indus- trial ultrashort pulsed lasers are commercially available with average powers in the range of 100 W, pulse ener- gies up to 400 µJ and repetition rates up to several MHz [5]. The increase in average power and repetition rate of the ultrafast laser has led to improved throughput and industrial productivity together with the occurrence of some problems. In fact, the expected advantages in terms of higher quality and efficiency can be counterbalanced by other drawbacks such as heat accumulation. The lat- ter occurs because pulse after pulse, fractions of laser energy released onto the target in the form of heat lead * O. Jedrkiewicz, ottavia.jedrkiewicz@ifn.cnr.it | 1Dipartimento di Scienza e Alta Tecnologia, Università degli Studi dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy. 2UAB Altechna Rnd, Vilnius, Lithuania. 3CNR, Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie, Udr di Como, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy.

[PAGE 2] Vol:.(1234567890) Research Article SN Applied Sciences (2020) 2:1589 | https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-03327-4 to irreversible thermal damage, such as cracks or melting, which worsen the quality and precision of the manufactur- ing process. One solution to overcome the issues related to heat accumulation when using high-repetition-rate lasers has been to employ the so-called burst mode (BM) pro- cessing. The latter consists in using sequences (or bursts) of several ultrashort laser pulses with inter-pulse time delay shorter than 1 µs [6]. The most interesting studies conducted on BM processing with inter-pulse time delay on the nanosecond scale showed that under some experi- mental conditions, bursts improved the heat-related issues [7, 8]. In the present paper, we shall make a comparative study between the standard single-pulse laser processing and the BM laser processing applied to a particular case of micromachining of transparent dielectric samples, i.e., micro-hole drilling by means of finite-energy pulsed Bessel beams [9, 10] The ultrashort laser microfabrication tech- nique has recently found great interest for material pro- cessing such as micro-hole drilling and cutting, and such machining processes have indeed been recently applied in thin glass samples by using “non-diffracting” Bessel–Gauss beams [11–15]. The latter have cylindrical symmetry and are featured in the transverse cross section by an intense central spot surrounded by weaker concentric rings, with the advantage that their use allows an easier manipulation of the diameter and depth of the microchannels or micro- holes to be created [16–21]. Moreover, a sample transla- tion along the beam propagation direction for in-depth microstructuring is not necessarily needed thanks to the elongated focal length of the BB, in contrast to the use of standard processing techniques that employ focused Gaussian pulses combined with a sample translation in three dimensions often requiring multiple shot machin- ing. It is worth noting that finite-energy Bessel beams (BB) have been the object of intense research and applications in different fields, thanks to their self-reconstruction prop- erties and their capacity of maintaining a smooth longi- tudinal fluence profile under both linear propagation and nonlinear propagation [22]. Our work focuses on the study of the laser micro-drill- ing process and the observation of the through-holes obtained in a 200-µm-thick glass sample, in two differ- ent laser fabrication regimes, by means of a picosecond Bessel–Gauss beam. The machining process is based on the combination of such non-diffracting beams with a trepanning-like technique, already used for the etching of glass–air interfaces and for preliminary results on micro- hole drilling in thin glass samples [15]. Different param- eters and their effect such as the number of writing circular trajectories, the fabrication speed, the pulse energy and the pulse density are studied and optimized. In particular, we compare the results and the morphology of the holes obtained with a high-repetition-rate laser in the single- pulse mode and in the burst mode machining regime, respectively, highlighting advantages and drawbacks of these two microfabrication regimes in the context of the BB hole drilling process. 2 The experiment The laser microfabrication technique used to drill round through-holes in thin glasses, without the need of chemi- cal etching, is based on the use of a zero-order pulsed BB impinging orthogonally to the sample surface combined with spiraling writing trajectories as in a trepanning pro- cess [15]. The experimental setup is divided into two parts, consisting in the micromachining part and the sample imaging part. A scheme of the setup is shown in Fig. 1. The BB is generated by means of a fused silica axicon, with base angle 훾= 1◦ and refractive index nax = 1.45. Given the laser input beam size, the BB is typically featured by a 50 μm core size and 60 cm Bessel zone length (non-diffracting length); thus, in order to drill a few hundred µm thick sam- ple, it is demagnified by a telescope that is composed of a lens (with focal length f1 = 300 mm) and a microscope objective (focal length, fobj = 9 mm). The resulting beam having a cone angle of 15° is featured by a core of 1.5 µm and a Bessel zone of the order of 460 µm. The beam is then deflected and sent vertically down toward the dielectric sample positioned on a 3D motorized stage which can be moved in all directions with micrometer precision and is driven by the software SCA, System Control Application (Altechna Rnd). A dichroic mirror is positioned between the lens and the objective, in such a way to allow an online imaging on a CCD camera of the sample, back-illuminated by a red light. The laser pulse energy is modified by means of neutral density filters. Note that the final beam features are characterized in air before the micromachining process by means of an imaging system (not shown). The experiments have been performed by using a high- repetition-rate infrared pulsed laser (Picoblade2, Lumen- tum). This laser delivers pulses at 1064 nm with a fixed pulse width of 10 ps and a laser repetition rate (LRR) of 200 kHz. It can operate in single-pulse mode or in burst mode. The single-pulse mode generates a single pulse every ∆τ = LRR−1 s, with a maximum energy arriving at the sample of 150 µJ (taking into account the beam path losses), and the burst mode produces packets of closely distributed pulses separated by ∆τ. In the same packet of pulses, the distance between pulses is given by ∆τB (see Fig. 2) which can be equal to 12 ns or 156 ns, respectively, depending on the burst mode used in our experiments. The maximum burst package energy arriving at the sam- ple in this operating regime ranges from 290 to 320 µJ

[PAGE 3] Vol.:(0123456789) SN Applied Sciences (2020) 2:1589 | https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-03327-4 Research Article depending on the burst type used, as we shall see in the following. Note that the energy values reported through- out this paper have been measured with a maximum uncertainty due to laser fluctuations of about 1%. The software SCA allows the design of writing patterns for the micromachining of the considered materials. Note that in our setup, as described above, it is the sample which is moved with respect to the Bessel beam. For our drilling experiments, the writing trajectory is spiraling as described in Fig. 3. It is interesting to note that different parameters can affect the hole quality and morphology: the distance between circles (denoted in the following by “step”), the number of circles, the density of pulses (pulses mm−1), the speed of fabrication and the relative position between the Bessel beam and the sample thick- ness. The distance between the writing circles (or more precisely semicircles as shown in Fig. 3) affects the radial density of the impinging pulses. Changing the number of circles modifies the size of the holes, with a minimum Fig. 1 Scheme of the experi- mental setup typically used for Bessel beam micromachining Fig. 2 Scheme of the pulsed laser operating modes Fig. 3 Example of spiraling writing trajectories programmed with SCA for the hole drilling

[PAGE 4] Vol:.(1234567890) Research Article SN Applied Sciences (2020) 2:1589 | https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-03327-4 needed number (for a maximum aspect ratio of the hole); this number also depends on the thickness of the sample to drill. It is worth noting that the density of pulses, the speed of fabrication and the laser repetition rate are linked together. While for low repetition rate high power laser systems with fixed repetition rate, the speed determines the pulse density according to in the high-repetition-rate regime with a beam delivery featured by a chosen fixed pulse density as for the Pico- blade laser case, we can calculate an equivalent repetition rate (ERR) as and therefore the temporal distance between two con- secutive pulses can be modified by changing the speed or/ and the pulse density. Note that in most of our machining tests, as shown in the following, the pulse density (which tells us the number of laser shots that must be contained within a given spatial distance) is kept fixed and the same, in both the single-pulse and the BM drilling modes. In both operating laser regimes, this is ensured by software and hardware interfaces between the laser and the motorized stage guaranteeing a constant synchronization between the arrival of the single pulses (or bursts) and the stage movement. Finally, the relative position between the Bessel zone and the sample has to be set in order to optimize the beam interaction along the whole sample thickness. This is done by positioning the BB in such a way that the Bessel zone (Bessel intensity profile along propagation) is symmetri- cally distributed along the sample thickness, i.e., with the maximal intensity in the middle of the bulk. 3 Single‑pulse micromachining mode In this work, we have analyzed the possibility to drill, by means of picosecond Bessel beams and in two different laser fabrication regimes through-holes in a 200-µm-thick AF 32 glass sample featured by a low thermal expansion coefficient. The study presented here extends previous preliminary work on the etching and micro-hole drilling with Bessel beams [15], and by presenting new results, it allows to make a comparison between the achievements obtained in the single-pulse machining regime and those obtained in the BM regime. In both cases, several tests have been performed by modifying different fabrication parameters. In this section, we present results obtained in the standard single-pulse microfabrication configuration. (1) Pulse density = LRR∕speed = 1∕(speed ⋅Δt) (2) ERR = Δt−1 = speed ⋅pulse density 3.1 BB spiraling hole drilling with fixed pulse density First experimental tests were performed in the single- pulse machining mode regime in order to generate micro- holes in similar conditions to those of the previous work [15]. The pulse energy used was about 100 μJ, and taking into account the dimension of the Bessel core and the laser pulse duration (10 ps), we can estimate a pulse peak inten- sity of about ­1014 W.cm−1, enough to trigger the photoioni- zation process. The typical machining parameters include a fabrication speed of 0.8 mm s−1, 60 writing circles, with a spatial step between them of 0.25 µm, and a chosen pulse density of 5000 pulses mm−1. Note that initially the glass sample was drilled several times, by running at the same position the whole spiraling writing trajectory more than once, in order to identify with the available energy the minimum number of processing passes needed for a through-hole generation. In Fig. 4, we show the results obtained in one machining pass and two machining passes, respectively: one pass led to the formation of a through-hole with very different apertures sizes at the top and bottom surfaces, attributed to an insufficient pulse energy, while the test with two writing passes has shown the possibility to generate even with energy limitation a well-defined and more homogeneous through-hole. Tests with a greater number of writing passes did not lead to any substantial difference with respect to the latter case, so in the following experiments the holes are generated with two machining passes. The glass was drilled along its thickness near the edge of the sample, allowing us after the fabrication to analyze with a microscope objective the morphology of the hole along the whole sample thick- ness. We can observe that the entrance aperture is bigger than the exit one and it has a slight taper shape. Note for Fig. 4 Optical microscope images of micro-holes performed in a 200-µm-thick AF32 glass in one or two writing passes, in the stand- ard single-pulse machining regime. a Top surface of the sample, b bottom surface, c lateral view of the through-hole drilled in two writing passes. Speed of fabrication 0.8 mm s−1, pulse density 5000 pulses mm−1, 60 writing circles

[PAGE 5] Vol.:(0123456789) SN Applied Sciences (2020) 2:1589 | https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-03327-4 Research Article completeness that with the same trepanning technique and fabrication parameters, it is possible to generate larger holes as for instance the millimeter size diameter hole shown in Fig. 5. The spiraling trajectory (with 60 cir- cles) was performed only within a 50-μm-thick corona with radius equal to the radius of the desired aperture. In other words, in this case, instead of starting the spiraling laser machining from the center of the scheme shown in Fig. 3, the beam can be initially positioned on the semi- circular trajectory which lies at a distance approximately equal to the radius of the mm-sized hole to be drilled. The 60 writing circles can then be processed from that point with the result that only a 50-μm-thick corona will be effec- tively machined by the BB. It is important to point out that there is therefore no need to machine the whole internal aperture area when holes of dimensions much larger than the sample thickness have to be drilled. In this case, after the two-pass laser writing process the internal part of the machined sample falls down spontaneously. 3.2 Dependence on the number of circular writing trajectories With the same fabrication parameters, we investigated the dependence of the micro-hole size on the number of writing circles used during the trepanning process. The test was performed with a number of circles going from 40 to 60 by steps of 5 and the results are shown in Fig. 6. The apertures diameters (in the range of 60–90 µm) both at the top and bottom surfaces increase with the number of circles, but with different rates relatively to the two surfaces. Moreover, the exit apertures are always smaller than the entrance apertures. We note nevertheless that the holes tend to be more regular when increasing the number of circles, as we can see in the plot of the dif- ference of the diameters (Fig. 7). The results have also shown the possibility of generating through-holes and thus with a minimum number of circular writing trajecto- ries (in our particular case, this was 40) and thus a mini- mum diameter that depends on the sample thickness. Fig. 5 Optical microscope image of a millimeter diameter hole generated in a 200-µm-thick AF32 glass with two writing passes, in the standard single-pulse machining regime. Top view of the sample. Speed of fabrication 0.8 mm s−1, and pulse density 5000 pulses mm−1, 60 writing circles in the machined area Fig. 6 Dependence of the hole diameters on the number of writ- ing circles during the fabrication in single-pulse machining regime (from 40 to 60 circles by step of 5). Optical microscope images of the top (a) and bottom (b) surfaces of the 200-µm-thick AF32 glass sample. Speed of fabrication 0.8 mm s−1 and pulse density 5000 pulses mm−1 Fig. 7 Plots of the diameters of the generated holes as a function of the number of writing circles relatively to the top and the bottom surface, respectively, and difference between the two diameters. The uncertainty in the measurements is given by the size of the data points

[PAGE 6] Vol:.(1234567890) Research Article SN Applied Sciences (2020) 2:1589 | https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-03327-4 3.3 Effect of the fabrication speed in single‑pulse machining regime The next step has been to study the dependence of the micro-holes morphology and quality on the speed of fabri- cation. As we have seen in the previous section, for a given laser pulse density set in the machining process, the speed of fabrication (i.e., the motorized sample holder speed) influ- ences the temporal distance between the pulses. Indeed setting the laser source in density mode implies that the repetition rate of the laser is automatically set in such a way to have the same number of pulses impinging locally on the sample. In other words, the larger the fabrication speed, the higher the laser repetition rate. In Table 1, we have reported the temporal distances between pulses and the estimated fluences for different speeds of fabrication in our experi- ment. Note that the fluence was calculated as by evaluating the number N of arriving pulses and the total area A covered by the pulses (i.e., by the partially (3) Fluence = (E × N)∕A superimposed BB cores) within the same time interval of 250 μs, where E is the pulse energy. The chosen time inter- val for the estimation of the radiation fluence is the maxi- mum temporal window in order to have only one laser shot in the case of lowest fabrication speed (0.8 mm s−1). Clearly, the number of total arriving pulses increases lin- early with the speed of fabrication. The area of incidence was calculated by taking into consideration the superposi- tion of the spatial cores of the pulses. Thus, the radiation fluence on the sample increases with the speed, while the temporal distance between two consecutive pulses decreases. The effect of the fabrication speed on the drill- ing process can be observed in Fig. 8. As we can see in the optical microscope images, the apertures present a good quality both at the top and bottom surfaces for speeds up to 2.8 mm s−1. For higher fabrication speeds, cracks and rough edges are evident in all the samples. This change in behavior may be explained by thermal effects occurring during the machining process. A decrease in the temporal distance between pulses can lead to higher thermal accu- mulation effects, implying that the pulses at their arrival on the sample interact with a soft and hot matter instead of a cold and re-solidified one. The increase in temperature of the modified zone causes a higher pressure against the surrounding area that could lead to unpredictable cracks. These results suggest that a complete cooling of the heat- affected region of our glass sample occurs in few tens of μs. In order to study the internal morphology of a hole drilled with speed 2.8 mm s−1, we performed a micro- fabrication across the lateral edge of the glass sample (semi-hole). Figure 9 shows the top (a), the bottom (b) and a lateral view (c, d) of the hole observed under the Table 1 Temporal delay ∆τ between arriving pulses and estimated fluences evaluated over an arbitrary time interval of 250 µm, as a function of the fabrication speed, in the regime of fixed density mode processing (5000 pulses mm−1) Speed [mm s−1] ∆τ [µs] Fluence [103 J cm−2] 0.8 250 1.4 1.8 111 2.9 2.8 71 4.1 3.8 53 5.1 4.8 42 6.0 5.8 34 6.7 Fig. 8 Optical microscope images of holes drilled with 60 writing circles in density mode (5000 pulses mm−1) presented as a func- tion of the speed of fabrication. The top row refers to the images of the top surface of the sample, while the bottom row refers to the images of the bottom surface. The fabrication speeds are 0.8 mm s−1 (a) and (f); 1.8 mm s−1 (b) and (g); 2.8 mm s−1 (c) and (h); 3.8 mm s−1 (d) and (i); and 4.8 mm s−1 (e) and (l). All images have the same scale bar (100 µm) as in (a)