[PAGE 1] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 328 (2024) 118411 Available online 18 April 2024 0924-0136/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Improving the fatigue property of diffusive film cooling holes in nickel-based single crystal superalloy via ultrashort pulse laser drilling coupled with abrasive flow machining Zhanfei Zhang a,b, Zhong Mao c, Wenhu Wang a, Huimin Xie b, Ruisong Jiang d,*, Yifeng Xiong a, Xiaobing Zhang c a School of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, Shaanxi 710072, PR China b AML, Department of Engineering Mechanics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China c AVIC Manufacturing Technology Institute, Beijing 100024, PR China d School of Mechanical Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610065, PR China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Single crystal superalloy Diffusive film cooling hole Surface quality Fatigue property Ultrashort pulse laser Abrasive flow machining A B S T R A C T A novel hole-making technique, which combines ultrashort pulse (UP) laser drilling with abrasive flow machining (AFM), has been developed to enhance the surface quality and fatigue resistance of diffusive holes in nickel-based single crystal (NBSC) superalloys. This study conducted a comprehensive analysis of the surface morphology and metallurgical characteristics of the hole wall, evaluated by fatigue testing at elevated tem­ peratures and fractography analysis. The findings demonstrate that AFM can effectively eliminate the solidified debris generated during UP laser drilling, significantly reducing surface roughness and inducing a rounded effect at the outlet acute zone of the diffusive hole. Such improvements have been shown to increase the fatigue life of the holes by up to 50.6 % compared to those without polish. Furthermore, the crystal plasticity finite element method (CPFEM) was employed to investigate the localized stress concentration and the accumulation of plastic slip around the diffusive hole, elucidating the mechanisms behind fatigue failure in NBSC superalloys. The study also discusses the influence of the different hole-making technology on the fatigue properties of diffusive holes, integrating CPFEM results with analyses of surface quality and fatigue fractography. The study conducted in this study can provide valuable guidance for the fabrication of diffusive holes in turbine blades. Furthermore, it can also improve our understanding of the fatigue failure mechanism of diffusive holes in NBSC superalloy. 1. Introduction With the development of aircraft engines, increasing the thrust-to- weight ratio of the engine is accomplished by consistently raising the inlet temperature of single crystal turbine blades. Modern aircraft en­ gines operate at temperatures exceeding 2000 K, surpassing the thermal endurance of nickel-based single crystal (NBSC) superalloys (Li et al., 2023b). To mitigate this challenge, advanced cooling technologies, such as diffusive film hole cooling (Liu et al., 2012) and double-wall cooling system (Skamniotis et al., 2021), have been developed to lower the surface temperature and enhance the thermal resistance of turbine blades. Nonetheless, the introduce of film cooling holes compromises the structural integrity of the blades, inducing localized stress concen­ trations near these holes (Zhang et al., 2022). Meanwhile, the diffusive film cooling hole is gradually replacing the circular hole owing to its superior cooling efficiency (Chen et al., 2021), which will cause a more complex multiaxial stress in the vicinity of the diffusive hole. Moreover, processing defects, such as recast and heat-affected layers, microcracks, and poor surface morphology, will be introduced in the drilling process. These defects exacerbate the risk of turbine blade failure under the extreme operational conditions characterized by elevated temperatures and complex, alternating stresses (Ebrahimzade et al., 2021). Conse­ quently, enhancing the surface quality of diffusive holes in NBSC turbine blades is imperative for prolonging their service lifetime and reliability (Zhang et al., 2023). In the initial of development, Electrical Discharge Machining (EDM) was predominantly utilized for processing film cooling holes, primarily due to its high processing efficiency and relatively low costs. However, * Corresponding author. E-mail address: jiangrs@scu.edu.cn (R. Jiang). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Materials Processing Tech. journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jmatprotec https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2024.118411 Received 29 December 2023; Received in revised form 5 March 2024; Accepted 14 April 2024

[PAGE 2] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 328 (2024) 118411 2 this method has been found to introduce certain defects, such as recast layer, microcracks, and heat affected layer within the processed holes. These defects can significantly influence the mechanical properties of the film cooling holes, thereby affecting the service performance and longevity of turbine blade. Shang et al. (2019) identified a recast layer around cooling holes, manufactured by EDM, as a source of early crack initiation and strength reduction in NBSC specimens. Wen et al. (2017) found that high-speed EDM creates more microcracks in the recast layer surrounding cooling holes compared to forming EDM, leading to a shorter fatigue life. Li et al. (2022), (2023b) reported that internal de­ fects, radial cracks, and surface roughness significantly affect crack initiation and propagation, nonetheless, the fatigue properties of holes made by EDM are superior to those created by conventional laser dril­ ling. Hence, it was imperative to develop the new hole-making method in order to improve the surface quality and service lifetime of film cooling holes in the turbine blade. Compared to conventional drilling methods such as EDM and tradi­ tional laser machining, Ultrashort pulse (UP) laser machining, charac­ terized by pulse durations shorter than 10 picoseconds (ps), is emerging as a notably promising approach for the fabrication of film cooling holes. (Li et al., 2019). Das and Pollock, (2009) conducted a study on the femtosecond laser drilling of the NBSC superalloy coated with thermal barrier coatings. finding that this method produced cooling holes free from surface defects like recast layers and microcracks, though a taper due to energy dissipation was noted. A research by Zhang et al. (2020) on UP-laser drilling revealed no formation of recast layers, microcracks, or heat-affected layers, although with some solidified debris adhering to the cooling hole’s inner surface. Wang et al. (2018) explored the impact of different scanning paths on cooling hole quality, concluding that spiral trepanning offered superior outcomes over percussion drilling and ring cutting techniques. Nonetheless, the study also noted a considerable taper in the holes, suggesting a need for further refinement of this method to improve the geometrical precision of the holes. Furthermore, it should be noted that UP-laser drilling, predominantly applied for manufacturing circular holes in previous study, may encounter chal­ lenges when used to fabricate diffusive holes with complex geometrical feature. The adaptation of UP lasers for such complex shapes has the potential to lead to increased processing defects. Consequently, there is a critical need for the innovation in the hole manufacturing methodolo­ gies that can improve the surface quality of diffusive holes, thereby addressing the limitations of current UP-laser drilling techniques in handling complex geometric structure. Abrasive flow machining (AFM) is a non-conventional manufacturing technique that polishes surfaces by extruding abrasive- laden media through or across the workpieces (Dixit et al., 2021). Recent advancements in AFM have demonstrated its effectiveness in polishing complex-shaped components, achieving significant improve­ ments in surface quality across various applications. Singh and Sankar, (2020) utilized AFM to polish a micro-slot, reducing its surface rough­ ness from 3.54 μm to 0.21 μm. Han et al., (2020) applied AFM to improve the surface smoothness and increase compressive residual stresses in micro-channels produced by selective laser melting. Zhang et al., (2022) reported on the uniformity and stability of abrasive media flow in AFM polishing of microporous materials, showing excellent re­ sults. Moreover, Liu et al., (2023) demonstrated that AFM could effec­ tively remove microcracks and recast layers in microholes drilled by EDM, significantly reducing surface roughness from 5.7 μm to 0.6 μm. Collectively, these studies underscore the capability of AFM in enhancing the surface integrity of micro and macro-structured compo­ nents manufactured through various process. Therefore, there is po­ tential for improving the hole-walled quality of diffusive holes by using the AFM technology. This study is dedicated to improving the surface quality and fatigue properties of diffusive holes in NBSC superalloys and aims to deepen our understanding of how the quality of diffusive holes influences the su­ peralloy’s fatigue behavior. To achieve these objectives, a novel composite hole-making technology that integrates UP-laser drilling with AFM polishing is employed for the fabrication of diffusive holes. The research undertakes a detailed examination of the hole-wall character­ istics, including surface morphology, microstructure, and nano- hardness, to evaluate their impact on the material’s fatigue perfor­ mance through high-cycle fatigue testing. Additionally, the study le­ verages crystal plasticity finite element method (CPFEM) simulations to investigate the localized stress and strain distributions around the diffusive holes and to elucidate the failure mechanisms inherent to diffusive holes in NBSC superalloys. By combining fractography analysis with CPFEM simulation results, this research further explores the failure mechanisms associated with diffusive holes manufactured by different technologies, offering insights into optimizing hole-making processes for enhanced diffusive holes’ fatigue property. 2. Experimental test methodology 2.1. Material and hole-making method In this study, the NBSC superalloy DD6 was selected for analysis, with its primary composition detailed in Table 1. The material origi­ nated from a cast single-crystal blank bar, which underwent heat treatment at high temperatures, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. The orientation of the blank bar’s axis was maintained within a 15◦deviation from the [001] direction. The microstructure of the DD6 alloy, as illustrated in Fig. 1b, is characterized by cuboidal γ’ precipitates embedded within a γ matrix. The specimens were fabricated in a dog-bone shape with di­ mensions of 30×5×1.5 mm, as depicted in Fig. 1c. Centrally located on the specimen, three diffusive holes with an inter-hole spacing of 2.5 mm were drilled to simulate the actual cooling hole configuration in turbine blades, shown in Fig. 1d. The detailed structure and dimensions of the diffusive holes are presented in Fig. 1e. The diffusive holes were manufactured in two steps: first, the diffu­ sive holes were drilled through the UP-laser, and then polished using AFM to increase the inner wall quality. Fig. 2 illustrates the UP-laser drilling and AFM polishing processes applied to the diffusive hole. The UP-laser drilling, depicted in Fig. 2a, employs a diode-pumped solid- state laser (Atlantic series, Lithuania) to create the diffusive hole in layers, following specific scanning strategies for material ablation shown in Fig. 2b,c. In the diffusive zone, a Z-shaped path ablates the inlet zone, while the outlet zone uses concentric circular scanning, with an average laser power of 4.8 W and a scanning speed of 300 mm/s ensuring the removal of the NBSC superalloy without significant recast layer or heat-affected zone formation, as verified by prior research (Zhang et al., 2021). Subsequent AFM polishing, detailed in Fig. 2d-f, utilizes a dual-vertical cylinder system to extrude an abrasive medium through the holes. The machining parameters of the UP-laser drilling and AFM are presented in Table 2. Note that this medium with low viscosity is particularly suitable for the machining of small and lengthy channels without introducing obvious geometric defects. The drilled diffusive holes underwent two polishing times: 10 cycles of AFM for rough polishing and 20 cycles for fine polishing, aiming to achieve different surface qualities. As detailed in Table 3, this process could result in three surface quality levels (good, medium, and poor), including an unpolished diffusive hole. For each hole-making method, five specimens were prepared: four for fatigue testing and one for sur­ face quality analysis. Table 1 The main compositions of NBSC superalloy DD6 in wt%. Cr Hf Co W Re Mo Ta Al Nb Ni 4.0 1.0 9.0 8.0 2.0 2.0 7.0 5.7 1.0 Bal Z. Zhang et al.

[PAGE 3] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 328 (2024) 118411 3 2.2. Measuring of hole wall quality and fatigue testing condition After drilling and polishing, one diffusive hole was cut along its axis using wire-EDM, indicated by the red dashed line in Fig. 3a. The surface morphology of this section was measured using a three-dimensional surface profilometer (InfiniteFocus G4), with results shown in Fig. 3b. Surface roughness was evaluated in three distinct zones of the diffusive hole-inlet, middle, and outlet, labeled as A, B, and C in Fig. 3b. Another section was made across the diffusive hole’s cross-section with WEDM, as illustrated by the blue dashed line in Fig. 3a, and subsequently Fig. 1. (a) displays a schematic of an NBSC blank bar, (b) show the microstructure of the DD6 single crystal superalloy, (c) and (d) display the specimen geometries and hole configurations in general, and (e) the structure and size of diffusive hole (laid-fan-shaped hole). Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of UP-laser drilling and AFM polishing. (a) displays the UP-laser processing system, (b) and (c) display the UP-laser drilling strategies used in the present work; (d) displays the AFM system, and (e) and (f) display the principle of AFM polishing of diffusive holes. Z. Zhang et al.

[PAGE 4] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 328 (2024) 118411 4 prepared for microscopic examination through metallographic polishing and etching. This section was examined using a scanning electron mi­ croscope (TESCAN TEGA3), as seen in Fig. 3c. Nano-hardness mea­ surements across the hole-wall zone were conducted using a nano- indentation instrument (Hysitron TI980, United States), with ten points measured at 5 μm intervals along the depth, detailed in the enlarged view of Fig. 3d. The quality of diffusive holes produced by three different manufacturing processes was assessed through high-cycle fatigue testing, as depicted in Fig. 3e-h, which shows the fatigue testing setup and procedure. Per Table 4, these tests were performed under uniform conditions: a stress load of 500 MPa and a temperature of 980 ◦C, following the Chinese standard GB/T 2039–2012. To minimize experi­ mental error, each process underwent four iterations of testing. Tem­ perature control within ±5 ◦C was maintained using a high-temperature furnace (Fig. 3f), with stress applied as a sine wave at a 0.1 stress ratio and 100 Hz frequency. Prior to testing, specimens were ultrasonically cleaned to remove surface contaminants, a detail shown in the enlarged view of Fig. 3f. Post-failure, the crack propagation and fractography were analyzed using a surface profilometer (InfiniteFocus G4) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, TESCAN TEGA3), as demonstrated in Fig. 3h. 3. Results and analysis 3.1. Surface morphology and roughness Fig. 4 presents the surface morphology of diffusive holes as captured Table 2 Experimental parameters of UP-laser drilling and AFM. Name Symbol Value /unit Pulse duration τ 2.1 ps Focusing diameter df 48 μm Repetition frequency f 75 kHz Laser wavelength λ 1030 nm Average laser power P 4.8 W Scanning speed Vs 300 mm/s Scanning Width H 0.01 mm Pressure of assisted blowing FB 0.35 MPa. Mean size of SiC abrasives ds 25 μm Volume fraction of SiC abrasives wt% 30 % Pressure of AFM F 6 MPa Table 3 Experimental design for the diffusive hole manufactured by different processes. Number Hole making process Hole-wall quality (Predicted) Number No.1 UP-Laser drilling (Without polish) Poor 5 (4 fatigue tests+1 quality analysis) No.2 UP-Laser +10 cycles AFM (Rough polish) Medium 5 (4 fatigue tests+1 quality analysis) No.3 UP-Laser +20cycle AFM (Fine polish) Good 5 (4 fatigue tests+1 quality analysis) Fig. 3. Methods for the hole-wall quality analysis and fatigue testing condition. (a) a schematic diagram of a diffusive hole; (b) the surface topography and one measured surface profile for the diffusive hole; (c) depict the microstructure on the hole-wall zone, whereas (d) depicts the measured position of nanohardness. (e) displays the fatigue experiment device; (f) shows the high-temperature furnace and fatigue specimens; (g) displays ruptured specimen, and (h) show the measured crack propagation paths and fractographies of ruptured specimen. Table 4 High-cycle fatigue experimental conditions for NBSC superalloy with holes. Specimen number Hole processing technology Stress (MPa) Temperature (◦C) Number No.1 (Without polish) 500 980 4 No.2 Rough polish 500 980 4 No.3 Fine polish 500 980 4 Z. Zhang et al.

[PAGE 5] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 328 (2024) 118411 5 by a surface profilometer, showing macroscopic morphologies for diffusive holes created via UP-laser drilling without polish, rough polish, and fine polish in Fig. 4a-c, respectively. Despite the overall similarity in macrostructure, featuring a large diffusive-shaped inlet and a cylindrical outlet across different manufacturing processes, while noticeable localized differences emerge. Specifically, the middle zone of diffusive holes appears broader and the hole walls smoother after AFM polishing compared to those without polish, as highlighted by the red lines in Fig. 4a-c. Fig. 4d-l provide detailed views of the inlet, middle, and outlet zones (zones A, B, and C) of diffusive holes fabricated using three distinct processes. The surface roughness of these zones was quantified using the arithmetic mean value (Ra), with results showcased in Fig. 4m,n. Additionally, other roughness parameters such as the maximum peak-to- valley height (Rz), the average maximum height of the roughness profile (Ry), and the effective roughness profile valley radius (ρ) were measured to calculate the surface stress concentration factor, though the result are not detailed listed in the manuscript. Observations from Fig. 4d-l reveal significant variations in surface morphology across different zones. The inlet zones (A) exhibit a smoother surface for all processes, achieving a roughness below 0.4 μm (Fig. 4n). In contrast, the middle zones (B) display a notably rougher morphology with a periodic columnar structure, showing a roughness of approximately 3.8–4.0 μm (Fig. 4n), about ten times higher than in the inlet zones. The outlet zones (C), depicted in Fig. 4j-l, have a roughness of around 1.4 μm (without pol­ ish), which significantly improves to 0.6 μm following AFM polishing, indicating a superior finish compared to the diffusive hole without polishing. Comparing the surface quality of diffusive holes manufactured by various technologies indicates that the inlet zone exhibits good surface quality, whereas the middle zone’s quality is notably poor. Application of AFM polishing to these zones resulted in no significant changes in the middle zone but led to a substantial reduction in surface roughness in the outlet zone. Therefore, AFM polishing effectively minimizes surface roughness and improves the surface quality of the diffusive hole’s outlet zone. Fig. 5 elucidates the principles of UP-laser drilling and AFM pro­ cesses applied to fabricate diffusive holes, with schematics of UP-laser drilling provided in Fig. 5a-d. During the UP-laser drilling, as depicted in Fig. 5c, the diffusive hole is drilled layer by layer, employing zigzag scanning for the inlet zone and concentric circular scanning for the outlet zone. In the inlet zone, the laser efficiently ablates the material, which is then fully removed via assisted blowing, yielding a high-quality surface finish, as evidenced in Fig. 4d-f. The middle zone, subjected to a Fig. 4. Surface morphology and surface roughness of diffusive holes manufactured by different hole-making technologies. (a)-(c) shows the macroscopy morphology of diffusive holes manufactured by UP-laser drilling (without polish), rough polish, and fine polish, respectively. (d)-(f), (g)-(i) and (g)-(l) display the magnified view of the inlet, middle, and outlet zones (zones A, B and C) manufactured by the different technologies, respectively. (m) and (n) display the surface roughness values on the three zones of diffusive holes manufactured by the distinct technologies, where the error bars represent standard deviation values were calculated by STDEV.P in EXCEL. The positions of nine zones (zones A1-A3, B1-B3 and C1-C3) are marked in (a)-(c). Z. Zhang et al.

[PAGE 6] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 328 (2024) 118411 6 Z-shaped scanning path, exhibits a distinct periodic waveform on the hole wall due to the stair-step effect, a finding corroborated by Zhang et al., (2020). In contrast, the outlet zone’s drilling triggers complex physical reactions, including vapor/plasma plume formation and phase explosion due to high laser energy and beam interference in a confined space, as detailed by Liu, (2020) and illustrated in Fig. 5d. This results in the generation of significant ablation material, consisting of molten and evaporated metal along with ablated plasma, at the hole’s bottom. The high internal pressure then expels this ablated material (Fig. 5a,b), promoting the development of a periodic columnar structure in the middle zone, shown in Fig. 4g-i. Concurrently, the deposition of ablation material in the outlet zone leads to a rough surface morphology, as depicted in Fig. 4j. Fig. 5e illustrates the AFM process applied to a diffusive hole. It can also be observed from Fig. 5e that a significant size difference between the inlet and outlet zones due to the diffusive opening. Given the same external force, the pressure exerted on the circular zone at the outlet is substantially higher than that on the diffusive zone at the inlet, as indicated by the shading in Fig. 5e. Additionally, in accordance with the principle of volume invariance, the media flow velocity is higher in the outlet zone than in the inlet diffusive zone. Research by Jain et al. (1999, 2009) has shown that high pressure and increased media flow speed facilitate material removal, as illustrated in Fig. 5f,g. Consequently, the combination of high compressive force on the abrasives and rapid media flow velocity enhances material removal in the outlet zone, thereby improving its surface quality (Wang et al., 2021). However, in the middle zone, reduced pressure and slower media flow result in a lower rate of material removal, leading to a less effective polishing outcome in this area. Furthermore, Jain et al. (2009) observed that increasing the number of AFM cycles elevates the material removal rate (Fig. 5f), suggesting that extended polishing durations can further enhance the surface quality of the diffusive hole’s outlet zone, as demonstrated in Fig. 4m,n. 3.2. Microstructure and nano-hardness The microstructural characteristics of diffusive holes fabricated through varying processes are presented in Fig. 6. Macroscopic and magnified views of the hole-wall microstructures created by UP-laser drilling without polish, rough polish, and fine polish are depicted in Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of the UP-laser drilling and AFM for the diffusive hole. (a) and (b) schematic of UP-laser drilling of diffusive hole from the side and front views, respectively, (c) the two scanning paths used in the inlet and outlet zones of diffusive holes, (d) schematic of the laser ablation process, (e) schematic of AFM of diffusive hole, (f), (g) show the influence of pressure, cycle numbers, and media flow speed on the material removal rate obtained in Jain et al., (1999), (2009). Z. Zhang et al.