[PAGE 1] Composite Structures 299 (2022) 116102 Available online 17 August 2022 0263-8223/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Crashworthiness analysis of thin-walled aluminum columns filled with aluminum–silicon carbide composite foam Michał Rogala a,*, Jakub Gajewski a, Katarzyna Gawdzi´nska b a Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Department of Machine Design & Mechatronics, Lublin University of Technology, Nadbystrzycka 36, 20-618 Lublin, Poland b Faculty of Marine Engineering, Maritime University of Szczecin, Willowa 2-4, 71-650 Szczecin, Poland A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords Thin-walled structures Energy absorber Foam filling Aluminum foam Porous structures A B S T R A C T The dynamic development of the automotive industry has resulted in the continuous improvement of thin-walled energy-absorbing components. For the sake of passengers’ safety, the structures, as well as the materials of which they are made, are modified. In this study, the use of aluminum–silicon carbide composite foam as a filling of thin-walled aluminum profiles was investigated. Samples were subjected to axial dynamic crushing force with the same initial energy 1700 J. Based on the course of force values, the crush efficiency indices were determined. The paper also presents a comparative analysis in the form of numerical simulations using the finite element method. The results for profiles filled with foam of length 40 mm −200 mm at 20 mm intervals are tabulated to determine the effect of foam length on the behavior of the energy absorber. In addition, the article studies the effect of the initial position of the ex-situ foam and its cooperation with the trigger on the energy efficiency indicator in a dynamic crush. 1. Introduction Nowadays, the aspect of passive safety is commonly considered when designing engineering structures. The largest industry using energy absorption by thin-walled elements called energy absorbers is the automotive industry. Originally, the vehicle structure was protected by rigid steel elements attached to the front and rear to protect the occu­ pants. This solution caused high overloads during collisions, but it worked well at times when vehicles reached low speeds. Developments in vehicle design and performance have led to a greater focus on improving the structural elements of the vehicle and consequently the development of elements called passive absorbers. One of the first authors to present research on crash-boxes was Alexander [1], who in the 1960s presented analytical equations for the behavior of round-section tubes subjected to axial loading. He deter­ mined the relationship between load and parameters such as diameter, wall thickness, and material data. This was a very basic mathematical model that was developed over time and presented by Jones et al. [2] and Wierzbicki et al. [3]. An extensive analytical description of the crushing of circular and square columns made it possible to predict the crushing behavior and to estimate values such as crushing force, crush distance, and overloads. Continued research in the field of passive safety has led to two key books that provide in-depth coverage of both quasi- static and dynamic crushing [4,5]. Careful examination of the columns revealed both positive and negative sides of using them as an energy absorbers. The main disadvantage was the large peak force at the beginning of the crush. It resulted in high overloads at the beginning of the crush and low efficiency of the first fold [6,7]. To improve the absorber performance, crush initiators started to be used. Originally in the form of transverse bends on the sidewalls, their purpose was to facilitate the collapse of the wall and to change the form of buckling, which determines where plastic hinges would occur [8]. The change in geometry allowed for a change in stiffness in the direction of impact which reduced the value of the initial crushing force. Another very important aspect was the relationship of the column length to the location of the trigger [9]. If the trigger is placed too close to the bottom edge, the potential of the first half-wave may not be utilized and the trigger will have no effect. Placement too high may result in a change of the buckling form and fewer plastic hinges, i.e. lower energy absorption capability. Over the years scientists have undertaken studies of struc­ tures with other cross-sections such as rectangles, triangles, or omega [10,11]. As well as variations on its length, i.e. cones or square pillars with inclined side walls. Such solutions find their advantage, however, their fabrication is cost-intensive, which results in their application in unit production [12–14]. * Corresponding author. E-mail address: m.rogala@pollub.pl (M. Rogala). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Composite Structures journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compstruct https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2022.116102 Received 19 February 2022; Received in revised form 17 July 2022; Accepted 11 August 2022

[PAGE 2] Composite Structures 299 (2022) 116102 2 As a continuation of passive energy absorber research, engineers began to strengthen the structure by filling the interior. Initially, addi­ tional walls were used inside the profile (multi-cell) [15,16], which increased the energy efficiency, however, they also increased the value of the peak crushing force. Another solution investigated was to fill the thin-walled profile with a honeycomb structure [17–20]. The principle of operation was the same as in the case of multi-cell profiles, however, in the case of honeycomb filling the wall thickness could be much thinner which slightly improved the efficiency of the applied filling [21,22]. Developments in technology have made it possible to manu­ facture porous metal structures, the properties of which have interested scientists to study their energy efficiency. The first paper with an analytical description of the behavior of a foam-filled profile was pre­ sented in 1988 by Abramowicz et al. [23]. In the following years, work began to appear with analyses of material properties and energy per­ formance of porous structures under quasi-static as well as dynamic loading [24,25]. Analyzing the filling of thin-walled profiles, we can identify-two types of in-situ and ex-situ manufacturing [26–28]. The first type involves the formation of foam inside the profile, where, due to hardening, the foam forms a bond with the walls of the profile. The adhesive connection improves the mechanical energy absorption mechanism and the efficiency of the whole structure increases. Such studies have been conducted by Duarte et al. [29], where foam-filled tubes were subjected to three-point bending. The tests showed that the in-situ foam models, as a result of the interlocking of the rough surfaces, cooperate better and the load transfer from the tube structure to the foam is enhanced. However, as the authors rightly note in the case of aluminum profiles due to the formation of a passive layer in contact with atmospheric air, the formation of a chemical bond is highly impeded. In order to create a good surface-foam bond, before starting the process of foam formation inside the profile, appropriately prepare its surface. An important factor in the production of in-situ foams is the amount of material that is to undergo porosification. In the case of too much of it, the foam produced may form a stiffer structure with higher density in some places. This behavior results in a density gradation that can overstiffen the structure. Another example of the use of porous structures in energy absorption is hybrid structures. In the literature, the common use of open-pore foams is to soak them most often with a synthetic material [30–32]. The results presented show that foam infiltrated with polymeric material stabilizes the crush of thin-walled structure and reduces the suscepti­ bility to global buckling, however, the effect on energy-absorbing ca­ pacity is closely related to the type of material used. Furthermore, fine metal spheres infiltrated with resin or rubber are also used as fillers, creating a structure called syntactic foam [28,33]. Such a solution as well as closed-pore foams have found use in the marine industry due to their buoyancy. The main advantage of syntactic foams is the ease of fitting the filling to the shape of the thin-walled structure, as well as the possibility of modifying the mechanical properties by using balls of different thicknesses or different matrix materials. The disadvantage of the abovementioned solution is the quality of the connection between the dispersed reinforcing phase in the form of balls and the matrix as well as the thickness of the bonding material between the balls, which is not the case with foams produced in the “traditional” way. Currently, research is noticing the use of composite structures [34] as energy absorbers. This is an area of research that may revolutionize passive safety and the approach to their use in motor vehicles. Com­ posite structures due to their structure i.e. fiber orientation, number of layers, thickness and the material they are made of (carbon, glass, or aramid) can achieve various mechanical properties and energy effi­ ciency [35–38]. It is also common to see isotropic materials combined with anisotropic materials, such structures are called fiber metal lami­ nate (FML). Research using this type of structure was presented by Ming et al. [39]. The authors used CFRP to reinforce a metal column with a square cross-section, which resulted in an increase in SEA of up to 135 % compared to the metal structure. However, due to the easy initiation of damage propagation of the composite structure, their use in the auto­ motive industry is still impossible. With even a gentle side impact on a composite column, damage may occur that can initiate the post-failure process in a completely different way than originally planned, reducing the energy absorbed value and energy performance indicators. Nowadays it has become common practice to dope isotropic mate­ rials to change their properties. In this way, composite porous structures have been developed. Due to their structure and significantly lower probability of structural failures which may decrease their energy ab­ sorption performance, the authors decided to investigate the use of composite foams as filling for columns used as energy absorbers in ve­ hicles. Porous structures are commonly observed in nature, such as the inside of a human bone. It resembles open-pore foam, which reduces the mass of the bone while maintaining its strength. To repair bone, syn­ thetic composite materials that can take on a porous structure called bone cement are used [40–42]. Overall, the use of numerical simulations has significantly reduced computational time and accelerated the pos­ sibility of the number of models tested due to computational cost [43,44]. In cases of multi-parameter analysis where many variables occur, e.g. geometrical parameters, neural networks are used. Regres­ sion analysis or optimization problems are often applied in energy ab­ sorption research [45–47]. In order to correctly analyze the structure and microstructure of composite foams, studies use a computed to­ mography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [48,49]. It allows for determining the distribution and shape of pores, as well as the dis­ tribution of the reinforcing phase, which is mainly responsible for the mechanical properties of the porous structure. An interesting study using X-ray microcomputed tomography was presented by Heitor et al. using X-ray microcomputed tomography as an auxiliary tool in the nu­ merical modeling of foam with mapping of its pores [50]. In addition, using an algorithm, the quality of the pore surface was improved by removing defects created during the scanning process. Correct surface mapping is particularly important to obtain correct results from finite element analysis. The present research is considered as a continuation of the results presented by Rogala et al. [51] during which thin-walled columns were filled with aluminum foam and subjected to axial crushing. The research will be enriched by the effect of changing the position of the porous structure on the performance indicators, as well as the comparison of the aluminum structure with the composite foam is presented. The main objective of the study was to analyze composite foam as an energy absorber applied in place of a concave crush initiator. According to the authors, a particularly important aspect is the cooperation of the trigger and the porous filling, which can increase the performance of the weakened structure of the thin-walled column. Aluminum-ceramic composite foams are widely used as thermal or acoustic insulation in Nomenclature U shortening of specimen Lo Initial length of a specimen σd dynamic yield stress σs static yield stress ˙ε strain rate C,P constant Cowper–Symonds relation H the half distance between adjacent plastic hinges t sidewall thickness c two widths of the profile δc crushing distance bf radius of toroidal plastic hinge I1, I3 integrals in Eq. (5) Fd m average crushing force for dynamic analysis vm average velocity of tup M. Rogala et al.

[PAGE 3] Composite Structures 299 (2022) 116102 3 the maritime industry. Due to the mechanical properties and non- flammability of the material, it can be used as a filling of the ship’s shell, which also acts as an absorber of mechanical energy during dy­ namic impact. 2. Crushing mechanism of thin-walled columns The dynamic crushing mechanism of thin-walled square columns has been widely described in the international literature. Thin-walled structures absorb mechanical energy due to plastic deformation. Plas­ tic hinges take a symmetrical or asymmetrical form according to the scheme shown in Fig. 1. They occur in an orderly manner due to a certain form of buckling, which depends on the geometric parameters of the profile. Since only symmetrical forms of buckling appear during numerical and experimental analyses, all the analytical equations presented in this study concern such behavior of thin-walled sections. The first quantity that can be determined is the energy absorbed by the folding element described by Eq. (1). E = M0(16HI1 bf t + 2πc + 4I3 H2 bf ) (1) Analyzing the efficiency of the crushing distance, it is assumed that in symmetrical collapse mode: δc 2H = 0.77 (2) To determine the mean crushing force, it is required to define the relationship describing the plastic deformation coefficient. Therefore, the uniaxial Cowper-Symonds constitutive equation was used for this purpose: σd σs = 1 + ( ˙ε C ) 1 P (3) The strain rate in axial crushing of thin-walled square sections was evaluated as: ˙ε = tvm 2bf δ (4) Fig. 1. Dynamic progressive buckling of column a) asymmetrical b) symmetrical. Fig. 2. Force diagram shortening with an indication of characteristic quantities. M. Rogala et al.

[PAGE 4] Composite Structures 299 (2022) 116102 4 where δ is the crush distance and vm is the mean velocity of the hummer (tup), which is defined as the initial velocity divided by two. The magnitude bf is the radius of the rounding, which is derived from the shape of the surface and can be represented by the following Eq. (5). bf h = 0.53(c t ) 1 P (5) Considering the equations mentioned above, the theoretical mean crushing force during dynamic deformation can be determined: Fd m M0 = 52.22(1 + (0.33 ( V cC )1 P )(c t) 1 3 (6) where: M0 = σ0 t2 4 During impact analysis, a very important aspect is a buckling mode, which affects the potential of profiles to absorb a specific amount of energy. The length of the half-wave is closely correlated with the width of the crash box and the thickness of the side wall, and is described by the following Eq. (7) [52]: H t = 0.99(c t) 2 3 (7) 3. Crashworthiness indicator To correctly interpret the results of dynamic crushing of structures serving as energy absorbers, crush efficiency indicators were developed [4,5]. The indices were presented at the turn of the 90 s, but their form is still valid and widely used in scientific research. The first most general information obtained during the crush is the energy absorbed and the distance over which the shortening occurred. An example of the force- shortening characteristic curve is shown in Fig. 2. The energy absorbed by the profile is determined as the area under the force-shortening curve and the magnitude is labeled in Fig. 2. It is referred to as an integral of the function in the shortening range on which the crushing process takes place and can be described by the following Eq. (8): EA(dx) = ∫dx 0 F(x)dx (8) The other quantities shown in the graphic above are the Peak Crushing Force (PCF), which is the highest value of force usually detected at the beginning of the crushing process for conventional crash- boxes, and the Mean Crushing Force (MCF), which is determined as the quotient of the energy absorbed and the distance over which the shortening occurred. MCF = EA(dx) dx (9) Based on these two forces, we can determine the first indicator, which is defined as Crush Load Efficiency (CLE) and represents the relationship between the mean and maximum force by the following equation: CLE = MCF PCF*100% (10) Another important indicator representing the amount of energy absorbed relative to the weight of the energy absorber is Specific energy absorption. It allows you to determine the performance of the structure with changing crash-box weight, for example, in the case of different fill lengths. SEA = EA m , [ J kg] (11) where: EA – energy absorbed by thin-walled structures. m – a mass of the specimen. The next indicator of crush efficiency is Stroke Efficiency (SE), which is the relationship between the length over which the crush occurred to the initial length of the specimen and is described by Eq. (12). SE = U L0 , [ −] (12) However, when evaluating profiles loaded with constant energy and not with the maximum value that the crash-box can absorb, the foam filling with a variable length would cause the index to decrease, which would misleadingly illustrate the influence of porous structure on the crush efficiency indicators, hence it was not included in the results section. 4. Materials and methods The subject of research is thin-walled aluminum profiles filled with porous aluminum–silicon carbide structures serving as energy ab­ sorbers. The profile of the square cross-section has a crush initiator in the form of a hollow spherical embossment on two opposite surfaces. The ex-situ foam was placed inside at the embossing point without addi­ tional adhesive reinforcement to determine trigger-foam cooperation. In the study, the authors analyze the effect of varying lengths of the foam fill on the energy performance of the crash box. In addition, the authors have analyzed the effect of the location of a particular foam length on Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of foam manufacturing 1 – kiln crucible, 2 – metal bath, 3 – SiC reinforcing compounds, 4 – stirrer, 5 – lance with gas dispersion rotor, 6 – culvert, 7 – frothing tank, 8 – metal-ceramic foam, 9 – foam reception via conveyor belt, 10 – general view of foam, 11 – the final product. Table 1 Description of conducted tests on thin-walled profiles. Name Foam length (X) [mm] Foam location [mm] Total mass [g] Cross section [mm] ALSiC_0 0 10 102 40x40 ALSiC-40 40 10 114 40x40 ALSiC-60 60 10 126 40x40 ALSiC-80 80 10–120 138 40x40 ALSiC- 100 100 10 150 40x40 ALSiC- 120 120 10 162 40x40 ALSiC- 140 140 10 174 40x40 ALSiC- 160 160 10 186 40x40 ALSiC- 180 180 10 198 40x40 ALSiC- 200 200 10 210 40x40 M. Rogala et al.

[PAGE 5] Composite Structures 299 (2022) 116102 5 the energy performance of the structure. This is closely related to the interaction of the infill with the buckling form obtained by the profile, thus the location of plastic hinges. The aluminum profile has fixed geometrical parameters, i.e. 200 mm height, 40x40mm cross-section, and 1.2 mm wall thickness. Moreover, the position of the trigger is constant and its center is 30 mm from the bottom edge as well as its geometrical parameters, which are shown in Fig. 3. The length of the foam fill (X) varied from 40 to 200 mm in 20 mm intervals. The foam was located 10 mm from the bottom edge as shown in the figure below, the exception was the 200 mm long fill that filled the entire length of the profile (Table 1). The thin-walled columns are from the Sapa Company of Chrzanow, Poland, whose parameters from a report derived from the company are included in Table 2. The columns were made of aluminum alloy AA6063, whose mechanical properties from the uniaxial tension test necessary for properly modeling the structure are shown in Table 3. The material model was based in the elastic domain on Young’s Modulus and Poisson’s ratio, and in the plastic domain on multi-linear stress–strain characteristics. According to scientific research, aluminum alloys are not susceptible to strain rate, making it unnecessary to use the Johnson- Cook constitutive material model to obtain valid results [53–57]. Table 2 Technical parameter of aluminum thin-walled tube. Name EN AW 6063 T6 Chemical composition [%] Si Fe Cu Mn Mg Zn Ti 0.54 0.23 0.008 0.051 0.481 0.005 0.021 Heat Treatment 8 h at 198 ◦C Mechanical properties* Re [MPa] Rm [MPa] A50 [%] Brinell Hardness 240 265 11.5 80 * according to EN ISO 6892–1. Table 3 Material properties of aluminum alloy (own research). AA. – 6060-T6 Stress σ [MPa] Strain Ɛ [-] Density ρ [kg/m3] 2700 200 0 Young’s Modulus E [MPa] 70,000 249.35 0.00248 Poisson’s Ratio [-] 0.33 279.98 0.0598 Fig. 4. Microscopic view of composite foam a) foam microstructure – optical microscopy (Keyence VHX-7000), b) Silicon Carbide particle visible in the foam structure (SEM – Hitachi SU-70 FE-SEM). Table 4 Aluminum-ceramic foam statistic data. N valid Average Minimum Maximum Standard deviation Area [µm2] 339 665987.5 16630.20 5,888,120 911572.4 Average diameter [µm] 339 784.6 145.51 2738 482.7 Circumference [µm] 339 2980.0 573.27 13,750 2038.7 Compactness 339 0.7435 0.2301 0.9898 0.1673 Table 5 Material properties of composite foam [58]. Density [kg/m3] 450 Relative Density 0.16 Young’s Modulus [GPa] 0.066 Poisson’s Ratio 0.31 Yield Stress [MPa] 3.81 Densification Strain 0.34 M. Rogala et al.

[PAGE 6] Composite Structures 299 (2022) 116102 6 The foam used in the experimental study was produced ex-situ. It was manufactured using the method of gas blowing into the liquid com­ posite. The manufacturing process took place at the Maritime Academy in Szczecin according to the patented technology of manufacturing foamed metal structures (P211439). The feedstock was aluminum alloy AlSi9 doped with silicon carbide (SiC) in the amount of 10 % by weight, and their size is about 20 μm (Fig. 4). The first production step is mixing, which is done mechanically. This is followed by melting the metal- ceramic charge until a stable temperature of 720 ◦C is reached (Fig. 3). After the temperature stabilization, the liquid material is transported to the frothing chamber with the stirrer working all the time at the speed of 150 rpm and simultaneous output of the frothing gas at the rate of 8 dm3/min. The foamed material is transported by means of a belt feeder, at the same time the cooling and stabilization of the struc­ ture of the foamed metal-ceramic composite is carried out. The porous structure’s surface was analyzed using Metilo software. The results of geometric parameters responsible for the shape of the resulting pores, as well as their surface area, were obtained from a properly processed graphic image. Proper analysis of the foam structure is essential for determining the quality of the final product. Silicon carbide aluminum foam is characterized by the following technical pa­ rameters shown below in Table 4. The porous material was modeled according to the literature position shown below in Table 5. An isotropic structure was assumed and the material is based on an elastic–plastic relationship with the element failure criterion. The shear failure for foam is based on the value of equivalent plastic strain at the element integration points, this means that the failure occurs when the failure parameter exceeds. When the failure criterion reaches the desired value, the stress components reset to zero and the element point is excluded from further calculations. The magnitude of the failure strain is assumed to 0.12 for the analysis. In order to validate the assumed material data, verification tests were carried out on an axial compression testing machine. The test was per­ formed on a Cometech machine as shown in the attached photos (Fig. 5) taken during the test. The dimensions of the verification specimen are 40x40x20 mm, the analysis was performed twice and the results are presented in Fig. 5. The following graph shows the stress–strain curves for the two experimental tests and the results for the data used for numerical modeling. The results show minor discrepancies due to the actual shape of the foam element i.e. pore distribution and their size. In the case of numerical analysis, an isotropic material of homogeneous structure was assumed for simplification of calculations. Due to such an assumption, the final results may differ from the real ones by a few percent at the most, however, the duration of numerical calculations is much shorter. For the ideal representation of the element, sometimes an X-ray micro­ computed tomography of the structure is executed so that we get the ideal representation of the real model, but this solution is used only for simple analyses, which anyway take a tremendous amount of time [59]. 4.1. Numerical tests Due to the multiplicity of cases presented in the study, the finite element method was used as a tool to examine more cases at a reduced cost. Abaqus CAE software was used in the study. The initial conditions of the analyses consisted of an axially loaded column filled with foam with mechanical energy of 1700 J. The energy components were a ve­ locity of 7 m/s and a striker mass of 70 kg. The analyses were carried out until the tup completely lost its velocity. The length of the foam fill (X) varied from 40 to 200 mm in 20 mm intervals. The foam was located 10 mm from the bottom edge as shown in the figure below, the exception was the 200 mm long fill that filled the entire length of the profile. The numerical analysis was performed in two steps. The first one was to obtain the buckling mode, then implement the geometry perturbation and dynamically load the specimen. Fig. 5. The test sample a) general view of uniaxial compression test b) close-up of the tested specimen. Fig. 6. Validation of the foam material model properties. M. Rogala et al.