[PAGE 1] research papers 150 https://doi.org/10.1107/S1600577516017562 J. Synchrotron Rad. (2017). 24, 150–162 Received 19 July 2016 Accepted 2 November 2016 Edited by M. Yabashi, RIKEN SPring-8 Center, Japan Keywords: X-ray grating interferometry; wavefront metrology; X-ray optics; XFELs. X-ray grating interferometer for in situ and at-wavelength wavefront metrology Yves Kayser,* Christian David, Uwe Flechsig, Juraj Krempasky, Volker Schlott and Rafael Abela Paul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland. *Correspondence e-mail: yves.kayser@psi.ch A wavefront metrology setup based on the X-ray grating interferometry technique for spatially resolved, quantitative, in situ and at-wavelength measurements of the wavefront at synchrotron radiation and hard X-ray free- electron laser beamlines is reported. Indeed, the ever-increasing demands on the optical components to preserve the wavefront shape and the coherence of the delivered X-ray beam call for more and more sensitive diagnostic instruments. Thanks to its angular sensitivity, X-ray grating interferometry has been established in recent years as an adequate wavefront-sensing technique for quantitatively assessing the quality of the X-ray wavefront under working conditions and hence for the in situ investigation of X-ray optical elements. In order to characterize the optical elements at any given beamline by measuring the aberrations introduced in the wavefront, a transportable X-ray grating interferometry setup was realised at the Swiss Light Source (SLS). The instrument, which is expected to be a valuable tool for investigating the quality of the X-ray beam delivered at an endstation, will be described hereafter in terms of the hardware setup and the related data analysis procedure. Several exemplary experiments performed at the X05DA Optics beamline of the SLS will be presented. 1. Introduction Following the introduction of X-ray grating interferometry (XGI) (David et al., 2002; Momose et al., 2003), its potential for X-ray wavefront metrology purposes was quickly recog- nized. Indeed, the method’s degree of angular accuracy is experimentally demonstrated to be of the order of tens of nanoradians (Weitkamp et al., 2005a) while the requirements regarding the longitudinal and transverse coherence of the beam as well as the photon ﬂux are quite moderate (Weitkamp et al., 2005b; Momose et al., 2006). This makes XGI suitable for investigating the X-ray wavefront at synchrotron radiation or X-ray free-electron laser (XFEL) facilities in order to detect X-ray wavefront distortions introduced by the optical elements. The need for sensitive wavefront metrology tools is driven by the increased quality of the X-ray radiation deliv- ered by the operational XFELs (Emma et al., 2010; Ishikawa et al., 2012) and the upcoming diffraction-limited storage rings (Eriksson et al., 2014; Yabashi et al., 2014). To proﬁt from the brightness and coherence of the delivered X-ray beam in spectroscopy, diffraction, scattering or imaging experiments, the optical elements have to be able to preserve the wavefront (or phase) properties. The challenge to steer diffraction- limited and coherence-preserved X-ray beams from the source towards the experiment deﬁnes extraordinary high-quality requirements on the production of the X-ray optics. In parti- cular, the ﬁgure errors of the mirrors have to be below ISSN 1600-5775

[PAGE 2] 100 nrad root-mean-square which is close to the current limit of state-of-the-art visible-light metrology with interferometers or proﬁlometers (Goldberg et al., 2013; Idir et al., 2013; Siewert et al., 2014; Yashchuk et al., 2015) and close to the limits of the currently available optics manufacturing technology (Thiess et al., 2010; Yamada et al., 2015; Sto¨rmer et al., 2016). Among the available at-wavelength wavefront diagnostic methods (Sawhney et al., 2013) like the pencil beam technique (Hignette et al., 1997; Sutter et al., 2012), the Hartmann sensor (Idir et al., 2014) or the speckle tracking approach (Berujon et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2015), XGI is nowadays a well estab- lished quantitative diagnostic method. It is used for assessing the quality of optical elements and detecting imperfections emanating from the X-ray beam itself or from X-ray optical elements. For metrology purposes XGI was applied to the investigation of multilayer mirrors (Weitkamp et al., 2005a; Rack et al., 2010), monochromators (Diaz et al., 2010; Rutishauser et al., 2013a), Fresnel zone plates (Wang et al., 2013a,b) and a single compound refractive lens (Rutishauser et al., 2011). It was also suggested to use XGI for the in situ monitoring of mirror surface ﬁnishing (Ziegler et al., 2007). Thus, XGI proves to be complementary to ex situ visible-light diagnostic tools like the long-trace proﬁlometer (Yashchuk et al., 2010; Flechsig et al., 2013), the nanometer optical component measuring machine (Alcock et al., 2010; Siewert et al., 2011) or the Fizeau interferometer (Hariharan, 1997). These are necessary and essential metrology instruments for the investigation and characterization of X-ray optical elements, as well as for cross-check, deterministic correction or validation measurements of optical surfaces during the manufacturing process or after delivery. Furthermore, cali- bration measurements and pre-alignment or mechanical adjustments prior to the installation of an optical element at a beamline can be conveniently realised using ex situ methods. Possible drawbacks of these methods are difﬁculties with steeply curved aspherical surfaces, the requirement of a reference surface for calibration or the limitation to one-dimensional measure- ments. Furthermore, the inﬂuence of the beamline environment, which often limits the performance of the optical elements, cannot be assessed by means of ex situ metrology measurements. Because XGI is an at-wavelength and in situ method, it permits to characterize optical elements under operational conditions in one or two dimensions and to detect in a non-invasive manner wavefront degradation caused by radiation damage, heat load or mechanical mounting (mounting, clamping, stress, vibrations). Indeed, XGI was used to characterize the heat bump of a monochromator subject to different incident radiation powers (Rutishauser et al., 2013a) and as a feedback tool to correct under working conditions residual wavefront errors by means of adaptive optics in order to optimize the optic’s performance (Wang et al., 2014; Marathe et al., 2014a). The coherence properties of the delivered X-ray beam have been studied as well by means of XGI (Pfeiffer et al., 2005; Diaz et al., 2010; Marathe et al., 2014b; Shi et al., 2014; Assouﬁd et al., 2016). With respect to XFEL metrology applications, the single-shot capability of XGI is extremely interesting. Mirrors and monochromators as well as the longitudinal position jitter of the photon source at the Linac Coherent Light Source (Emma et al., 2010) and at the SPring-8 Angstrom Compact Free-Electron Laser (Ishi- kawa et al., 2012) were investigated by means of XGI (Rutishauser et al., 2012; Kayser et al., 2014, 2016). In the following we describe a transportable X-ray grating interferometer and show typical exemplary applications in order to demonstrate the potential of XGI and to investigate its limitations. A comparable realisation of a portable XGI setup realised at the Advanced Photon Source was published very recently (Assouﬁd et al., 2016). The setup described hereafter was realised for measurements in the moire´ mode in order to proﬁt from the single-shot capabilities in view of measurements at XFELs. For the sake of completeness and consistency the principle of XGI and the required analysis steps of the experimental data will also be brieﬂy discussed. 2. Principle of XGI XGI is based on the detection of a periodic interference pattern created by the interference of the X-ray beams diffracted by a grating into positive and negative orders (Fig. 1). Downstream of the diffraction grating the inter- ference between the diffracted X-ray beams produces a Talbot carpet characterized by planes of high-intensity contrast at discrete and periodic distances (Suleski, 1997). The grating, in its one-dimensional version, is a line structure and, in its two- dimensional version, is a mesh pattern. The height of the research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2017). 24, 150–162 Yves Kayser et al.  X-ray grating interferometer for wavefront metrology 151 Figure 1 Schematic illustration of the principle of XGI in the moire´ mode. The diffraction of an incident plane wave into positive and negative diffraction orders (propagating in the ﬁrst order at an angle of =p1 with respect to the original propagation direction) by the diffraction grating gives rise to an interference pattern. The diffraction grating induces a phase shift of h1ð2Þ= where  is the wavelength-dependent decrement in the real part of the refractive index of the grating material. The absorption grating acts as a transmission mask. For small rotation angles of one grating with respect to the other (3 with respect to the horizontal axis in the ﬁgure), the resulting moire´ pattern can conveniently be imaged using an adequate camera system, whereas the spatial modulations with a high frequency cannot be resolved.

[PAGE 3] grating structures is typically chosen such that it causes a /2 or a  phase shift. The best diffraction efﬁciency of the diffracting grating into the 1st diffraction order is obtained with binary  phase shifting gratings and a duty cycle of 0.5 (Weitkamp et al., 2012). For such a diffraction grating and considering plane waves, the planes with the best contrast for the constructive interference pattern are at the so-called fractional Talbot orders dn = np 2 1 =ð8Þ (n being odd-numbered,  the wavelength and p1 the periodicity of the diffraction grating) and the periodicity of the interference pattern is equal to p1=2. Most position-sensitive detectors, however, do not present a sufﬁcient resolution to spatially resolve the interference pattern. To this prospect a second grating with absorbing structures having a pattern and a periodicity matching that of the interference pattern is positioned immediately in front of the detector. Its role is to serve as a transmission mask and it can be used in two different ways. In a ﬁrst conﬁguration the absorbing structures are aligned parallel to the interference pattern in terms of angular orientation around the beam propagation axis. A positional scan in the direction transverse to the grating structures over the course of one period of the absorption grating provides a measurement of the position-dependent intensity oscillations within each pixel. The pixel size deﬁnes then the spatial resolution with which the interference pattern is measured. This approach is called the phase-stepping mode in XGI. The alternative method is based on rotating the diffracting and absorbing gratings with respect to each other around the optical axis. The moire´ pattern resulting from the super- position of the structures from the absorption grating with the interference pattern generated by the diffraction grating has a periodicity coarse enough to be resolved by the position- sensitive detector. This approach is called the moire´ mode in XGI. Mathematically the moire´ pattern Imðx; yÞ is described by Imðx; yÞ ¼ cos 2 pmx x þ 2 pmy y   ; ð1Þ with pmx ¼ p2 sin 2  ðM0=MÞ sin 1 ð2Þ and pmy ¼ p2 cos 2  ðM0=MÞ cos 1 ; ð3Þ where p2 represents the periodicity of the absorption grating pattern, M and M0 stand for the experimental and the design magniﬁcation of the XGI setup, 1 and 2 are the tilt angles of the diffraction and absorption grating structures in the detection plane reference system and pmx and pmy correspond to the moire´ fringe periodicity in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. When tuning the periodicity of the moire´ pattern a trade-off between spatial resolution (improves with shorter periodicity) and angular sensitivity (increases with larger periodicity) of the measurement has to be made. Compared with the phase-stepping approach, the moire´ mode is less sensitive towards magniﬁcation issues resulting in resi- dual moire´ fringes. When considering divergent X-ray beams instead of plane waves, the interference pattern periodicity (and also the fractional Talbot order distances) have in prin- ciple to be corrected for by geometrical magniﬁcation factors (Weitkamp et al., 2004). The main advantage of the moire´ mode, however, is the possibility for single-shot measurements resulting in shorter total acquisition times compared with the phase stepping approach. With respect to possible applications at XFELs, the moire´ mode was therefore the conﬁguration of choice for the realised X-ray grating interferometer, despite its lower spatial resolution. In X-ray wavefront metrology applications, the X-ray wavefront incident on the grating interferometer can be reconstructed from a single image of the moire´ pattern and aberrations introduced into the wavefront by optical elements can be detected. In the case of a plane wave incident on the X-ray grating interferometer a set of parallel fringes would ideally be measured (for one-dimensional gratings). Any distortion in the recorded periodic interference pattern, e.g. a local lateral shift or a curvature in the pattern, reveals a locally modiﬁed propagation direction of the incident X-rays caused by the optical element under investigation. In this respect it is important that the grating structures are free of any distor- tions since the quality of the gratings directly impacts the measurement in terms of the quality of the recorded data and the following interpretation. This cannot be corrected for in the reconstruction of the wavefront since it usually is not possible to separate interference pattern distortions induced by wavefront aberrations from those due to grating structure defects with a ﬂat-ﬁeld measurement. Well fabricated gratings of good quality which do not present any deviations from their design are thus the key component of any XGI metrology setup. 3. XGI setup The gratings are usually fabricated from thinned Si wafers because of their ﬂatness, smoothness and stiffness, and because of the relatively low absorption coefﬁcient of Si. For the absorption grating, the grating trenches are usually ﬁlled with gold because of the large absorption cross-sections in the keV regime. Both Si and Au are commonly used in micro- fabrication processes and their properties during processing are well known. The challenge in the grating production is, especially for the absorption grating, the required high aspect ratio for hard X-ray energies and the small periodicity for better sensitivity. Moreover, the grating structures need to be positioned and aligned with high accuracy over the area covered by the grating pattern. A placement accuracy of the order of 1% of the line width can be achieved by current electron beam writer systems. If the latter supports a contin- uous path writing mode this allows furthermore to avoid stitching errors in the electron-beam lithography process (Schnabel & Kley, 2001) while the widths of the lines which research papers 152 Yves Kayser et al.  X-ray grating interferometer for wavefront metrology J. Synchrotron Rad. (2017). 24, 150–162

[PAGE 4] are written are controlled by the dose and the defocusing of the electron beam (David & Hambach, 1999). The grating structures are subsequently transferred into the Si wafer by means of an etching process. For one-dimensional grating patterns this can be anisotropic wet etching (David et al., 2007) while for two-dimensional patterns deep reactive ion etching has to be used (Rutishauser et al., 2013b). While this marks the last step in the production of the diffraction grating, the fabrication of the absorption grating needs a further proces- sing step (David et al., 2007; Rutishauser et al., 2013b). Either the grating trenches are ﬁlled with Au by electroplating (Rutishauser et al., 2013b) or the grating pattern is confor- mally covered by Au to produce a frequency doubled grating of gold structures (David et al., 2007). In both cases the grating trenches for the absorption grating have to be deep enough to deposit enough Au for a sufﬁciently large absorption of the incident X-ray photons. This improves the fringe contrast and the visibility. A detailed description of the grating production process is given by David et al. (2007) and Rutishauser et al. (2013b). Alternatively, gratings can be produced by the LIGA technique (Reznikova et al., 2008; Noda et al., 2008) or metal assisted chemical etching (Romano et al., 2016), respectively, the absorption grating can be replaced by a structured scin- tillator (Rutishauser et al., 2011). The line gratings used for the exemplary measurements with one-dimensional sensitivity at the X05DA Optics beam- line (Flechsig et al., 2009) of the Swiss Light Source (SLS) were designed for photon energies of 8.3 keV and 12.4 keV. The gratings were manufactured from 250 mm-thick polished Si h100i substrates which were thinned by deep reactive ion etching. The diffraction grating had a duty cycle of 0.5 and a periodicity of 4 mm and covered an area of 4 mm  4 mm. The absorption grating had the same area and duty cycle as the diffraction grating and a periodicity of 2 mm. The height of the gold structures was 10 mm. The grating parameters and their homogeneity throughout the grating pattern area were conﬁrmed by scanning electron microscopy. The gratings were ﬁxed by clamps made from tungsten wires on a ﬂat mounting surface with a central bore for the passage of the X-ray beam (Fig. 2). The mounting surfaces were themselves ﬁxed to a rotary support for the orientation of the grating surface around the beam propagation axis within an angular range of 20. The rotary supports were attached via 300 mm-long hardened stainless steel rods to holders. The mounting system using rods allows for a ﬂexible adjustment, only limited by the position of the holders, of the distance between the diffraction and absorption gratings while ensuring the parallelism of the grating surface planes. Moreover, independent vibrations of the gratings are minimized. The rotary supports were motor- ized with actuators having a minimum incremental motion of 0.1 mm and an on-axis accuracy of 5 mm. This converts to a minimum angular incremental motion of 0.00024 and an angular accuracy of 0.012. The actuators were connected to a universal multi-axis motion controller and connected through an Ethernet interface to the control PC. The motion control system is compatible with the Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System (EPICS). The moire´ patterns were recorded using a modular two- dimensional camera system coupled to a Ce-doped YAG screen (10 mm in diameter, 30 mm thickness) and a deﬂection mirror (Fig. 2). The mirror avoids exposure of the camera’s CCD chip to hard X-rays. The CCD camera allows for 14-bit acquisition and is directly connected through two bonded GigE interfaces to the control PC. This allows for a frame rate at full resolution of up to 112 images s1 which is compatible with the repetition rates of current XFELs in view of single- shot measurements. The chip consists of 1024  1024 pixels with a size of 5.5 mm. areaDetector software (Rivers, 2010), which is also based on EPICS, was used to control the camera. The camera was connected to an inﬁnity-corrected lens system and a long-working-distance objective with twofold magniﬁ- cation. The effective pixel size of the optical system was found to be 2.857 mm by means of an edge scan. The distance between the microscope objective and the ﬂuorescence screen was adjusted to the focal distance of the objective with the help of a Siemens star. A resolution of about 3 mm was assessed. Black kapton was mounted in front of the ﬂuores- cence screen in order to ensure a light-tight assembly. Dark images were acquired before each measurement to correct the recorded images for detector noise. The whole camera system was mounted on the same mounting plate as the inter- ferometer. This ensures that the whole XGI setup constitutes a single, rigid and stiff mechanical unit with a high resistance against mechanical instabilities. The setup has moderate space requirements and can moreover be conveniently transported, mounted and aligned at different instances. Both the motion control and the image acquisition system are independent of any beamline infrastructure and controlled through the Ethernet interfaces with one PC using the area- Detector and EPICS software to run measurements. Ulti- mately the realised XGI setup is ﬂexible in use, transportable and self-contained. The only requirement on the beamline is that less than 500 mm of space along the beam propagation research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2017). 24, 150–162 Yves Kayser et al.  X-ray grating interferometer for wavefront metrology 153 Figure 2 Schematic of the realised modular, transportable and self-contained XGI setup. The insets show the mounting of the gratings and the installed setup at the X05DA Optics beamline.

[PAGE 5] axis is available for installation of the XGI setup. In view of possible measurements in the phase stepping mode, as a complement to the moire´, one of the stepping motors can be replaced by a two-dimensional piezo stage which is supported by the motion control system. The grating interferometry setup was assembled for the realisation of exemplary measurements at the X05DA Optics beamline of the SLS (Flechsig et al., 2009). A cryogenically cooled Si(111) channel-cut monochromator was used to monochromatize the X-ray beam. A bendable toroidal mirror allowed the X-ray beam to be focused to a smallest possible spot size of about 70 mm  140 mm in our case. The mono- chromator and the focusing mirror can be independently inserted or retracted from the X-ray beam. Since the vertical propagation angle of the X-ray beam changes at the Optics beamline when inserting the mirror, the setup was mounted on the 2 arm of a diffractometer which allowed, in combination with the vertically movable optical table, for a proper align- ment with respect to the incident X-ray beam. 4. Moire´ pattern analysis For a quantitative analysis, the XGI setup ﬁrst has to be calibrated by recording the moire´ patterns at varying angular orientations between the diffraction and absorption gratings (Wang et al., 2011; Kayser et al., 2014). To do so, one of the gratings was scanned on an angular range centered on the position where the structures of both gratings are parallel to each other. For each measured moire´ pattern the fringe frequency in the horizontal and vertical dimension was extracted by means of a two-dimensional fast Fourier trans- form (FFT) and a sub-pixel ﬁtting routine using a two- dimensional Gaussian function (Fig. 3). From the variation of the vertical component pmy = 1=fmy with respect to the hori- zontal component pmx = 1=fmx of the fringe periodicity (see Fig. 3), information on the XGI setup can be extracted through a minimization procedure (Wang et al., 2011; Kayser et al., 2014). Solving equations (2) and (3) for cos 1 and sin 1, cos 2 and sin 2, respectively, depending on whether the diffraction or the absorption grating was moved during the calibration scan, a parametric relationship can be obtained through cos2  þ sin2  = 1, where  represents the scanning parameter (either 1 or 2): p2 pmx  sin 2  2 þ p2 pmy  cos 2  2 ¼ M0 M  2 ; ð4aÞ p2 pmx þ M0 M sin 1  2 þ p2 pmy þ M0 M cos 1  2 ¼ 1: ð4bÞ In the ensuing minimization procedure with respect to the experimental values p i mx and p i my of the moire´ fringe period in the horizontal and vertical directions, the unknown para- meters M and 2 [equation (4a)] and 1 [equation (4b)], respectively, can be extracted, Equation ð4aÞ ! min M;2 X i  p2 p imx  sin 2  2 þ p2 p imy  cos 2  2  M0 M  2 k ; ð5aÞ Equation ð4bÞ ! min M;1 X i  p2 p imx þ M0 M sin 1  2 þ p2 p imy þ M0 M cos 1  2  1  k : ð5bÞ Usually an L1-norm minimization (k = 1) is realised because of its lesser sensitivity to experimental noise. Once the angular position of the grating which was kept ﬁxed during the cali- bration scan is known, the angular orientation of the scanned grating can be obtained by means of equations (2) or (3) (Fig. 3). Furthermore, from the magniﬁcation M, the radius of curvature (ROC) can be calculated through R = d=ðM  1Þ, research papers 154 Yves Kayser et al.  X-ray grating interferometer for wavefront metrology J. Synchrotron Rad. (2017). 24, 150–162 Figure 3 In the calibration procedure, the fringe frequencies of each moire´ pattern are extracted via a two-dimensional FFT. The overall variation of the fringe frequency with angular orientation of the gratings with respect to each other allows us to calibrate the grating positions via a minimization procedure. More details can be found in the text.

[PAGE 6] where d stands for the distance between the diffraction and absorption grating. In practice we scanned an angular range of 7.33 with an angular stepping of 0.24. The limit for the width of the angular range to be scanned is the increasingly small peri- odicity of the moire´ fringe pattern when misaligning the grating structures with respect to each other: the moire´ pattern cannot be resolved and the fringe frequencies not extracted. The angular stepping, and thus the number of data points in the minimization procedure, allows the standard error on the minimization parameters to be minimized. The selected angular stepping presented the best compromise between the returned standard error and the overall acquisition time for a calibration scan. Prior to the minimization procedure the data points for which the coordinates of the 1st and +1st Fourier order were not symmetric to each other were rejected. This was essentially necessary around the central position of the scan where the 1st orders are difﬁcult to separate from the zeroth order. Once the XGI setup is calibrated, the moire´ patterns recorded at a single position of the diffraction and absorption gratings allow the incident X-ray wavefront to be investigated individually for each image. The processing of a measured moire´ fringe pattern is based on Fourier analysis (Takeda et al., 1982). In the ﬁrst step, as illustrated in Fig. 4, the moire´ pattern is multiplied by a Hann window to reduce boundary effects which may occur in the consecutive FFT calculation because of the implicitly assumed periodic boundary condi- tions. Next, the ﬁrst-order component is separated from the remaining frequencies by means of a band-pass ﬁlter (a box window since the zeroth and ﬁrst-order components are well separated from each other) and shifted to the origin. The shift removes the carrier frequency contribution to the measured intensity pattern. In addition, it simpliﬁes the following unwrapping procedure (Herra´ez et al., 2002) of the spatially resolved fringe phase ðx; yÞ obtained from the argument of the inverse FFT of the isolated ﬁrst-order component. When line gratings are used for the measurement, the fringe phase is obtained in the direction parallel to the moire´ fringes. For mesh-type grating patterns, the analysis procedure is analo- gous, except that two-dimensional versions of the Hann window, the FFT and the band-pass ﬁlter are used. In the Fourier space, instead of one pair of ﬁrst-order components, two pairs are present and the fringe phase is retrieved simultaneously in the horizontal and vertical dimensions from the respective ﬁrst-order components. Using the information of the calibration scan, the wavefront propagation angle in the horizontal or vertical direction can be calculated from the corresponding fringe phase (Rutishauser et al., 2012; Weitkamp et al., 2004), x ¼ M0 sin f sin r  1   x d þ p2 sin f 2d sin2 r xðx; yÞ; ð6aÞ y ¼ M0 cos f cos r  1   y d þ p2 cos f 2d cos2 r yðx; yÞ; ð6bÞ since M0 and d are known from the setup. Here, r represents the angle of the grating which was moved during the calibra- tion scan and f the angle of the grating which was kept ﬁxed. The aspherical component of the wavefront propagation angle, which may reveal aberrations in the wavefront from the expected spherical shape, can be retrieved by subtracting a ﬁrst-order polynomial. The ROC in the horizontal or vertical direction of the incident wavefront can be calculated from the fringe phase (Rutishauser et al., 2012; Weitkamp et al., 2004) or from the slope of the wavefront propagation angle (Kayser et al., 2014). research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2017). 24, 150–162 Yves Kayser et al.  X-ray grating interferometer for wavefront metrology 155 Figure 4 Flowchart of the Fourier analysis algorithm of a moire´ pattern recorded with horizontally aligned line gratings. The wavefront propagation angle only contains the vertical component. In order to retrieve the horizontal wavefront propagation angle, either the line gratings have to be turned by 90 or two- dimensional gratings have to used. More details can be found in the text.