[PAGE 1] INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRECISION ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURING Vol. 18, No. 7, pp. 923-930 JULY 2017 / 923 © KSPE and Springer 2017 Determining the Machining Parameters for Femtosecond Laser Helical Drilling of Aluminosilicate Glass Substrate Hyeon-Min Lee1, Jung Hyun Choi2, and Seung-Jae Moon1,# 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hanyang University, 222, Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul, 04763, South Korea 2 Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03760, South Korea # Corresponding Author / E-mail: smoon@hanyang.ac.kr, TEL: +82-2-2220-0450, FAX: +82-2-2220-2299 KEYWORDS: Glass, Drilling, Femotosecond laser In this work, a new laser helical drilling method with high geometrical accuracy is proposed for aluminosilicate glass (ASG) substrates. Laser drilling was performed from the bottom of the substrate to reduce the taper angle. The 400 µm-thick ASG substrates were drilled via a femtosecond laser beam with a wavelength of 1552 nm and a pulse duration of 800 fs. By applying this newly suggested method, thru-holes can be produced with a high roundness accuracy that is less than 20 µm, a small taper angle, low surface roughness of the sidewall, and high quality laser-drilled edges without cracks or chippings for hole diameters of 0.5, 1, 2, and 3 mm. Correlations are proposed between laser drilling parameters, such as ablation depth, scanning speed, vertical motion speed, and helical layer pitch, each of which are critical variables in drilling thru-holes in ASG substrates. Good surface quality of thru-holes can be experimentally obtained using the machining parameter values estimated by the proposed theory. Manuscript received: August 5, 2016 / Revised: March 8, 2017 / Accepted: March 27, 2017 1. Introduction Recently, several types of industrial glass have been used in advanced display applications. Due to the brittle nature of glass substrates, conventional drilling methods via a metal drill can cause serious defects, such as random breaking, cracks, and chipping. To overcome these problems, femtosecond laser drilling has gained attention as an alternative technology that can replace the conventional mechanical drilling of glass materials. Femtosecond laser drilling can concentrate high-energy densities onto very small areas with extremely short pulse durations. This combination of an extremely short pulse and a small focused spot results in the large photon fluxes required to initiate the non-linear absorption processes of multiphoton absorption and avalanche ionization in transparent glass substrates.1-3 This process initiation is crucial for glass machining via a femtosecond laser. Recently, among various types of industrial glass, aluminosilicate glass (ASG) has drawn significant interest for display applications, such as mobile phones, laptops, and tablet PCs. The ASG used for these applications, such as Gorilla® glass manufactured by Corning®, can be characterized as a specially toughened glass. The electronics industry requires a technology that can machine ASG according to the various shapes required for particular purposes. NOMENCLATURE Vscan = laser scanning speed Vapp_scan = appropriate laser scanning speed Vz = z-axis moving speed Vapp_z = appropriate z-axis moving speed HAZ= heat affected zone Fth= ablation threshold fluence Fa= incident laser fluence α = absorption coefficient CBEs= conduction band free electrons N=number of helical path layers Ld= ditch distance Ф= laser beam spot size Lscan=laser total scanning distance t= glass thickness Tscan= laser scanning time REGULAR PAPER DOI: 10.1007/s12541-017-0109-1 ISSN 2234-7593 (Print) / 2005-4602 (Online)

[PAGE 2] 924 / JULY 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRECISION ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURING Vol. 18, No. 7 Laser drilling technologies, such as single pulse drilling, percussion drilling, trepan drilling, and helical drilling,4-11 have been developed. The single pulse and percussion drilling methods are very useful for microscale thru-hole drilling with high material removal rates. Trepan and helical drilling methods are adopted to drill holes with larger diameters than the beam spot size and to obtain higher roundness accuracy by cutting around the circumference of the thru-holes. In the trepan drilling method, the vertical layer of the circumferential laser path is discontinuous due to the step-by-step vertical motion in the direction normal to the substrate thickness. However, the vertical path of the laser beam is continuous in the helical drilling method. Therefore, the sidewall quality of the hole is better with application of the helical drilling method. When the materials are ablated from the top surface of the substrate, the materials removed during the laser drilling process are accumulated around the thru-hole, resulting in the formation of a recast layer. Recent research reported that this layer could lead to micro-cracking, hole taper, and spattering in the thru-holes.12 To reduce the effect of the removed material, laser machining parameters were optimized so that the taper angle in a hole could be minimized during percussion laser drilling.7,10 In addition, to effectively get rid of removed materials, the effects of gas flow rates and underwater submersion were investigated to improve the surface quality of the thru-holes.13 The trepan drilling method was appropriate for cutting thin glass substrate with thicknesses of 50 and 100 μm.14 However, as the depth of a hole increases, the focused laser beam can be blocked at the inlet of the hole in the laser drilling process. This results in the reduction of the laser energy at the bottom of the hole. Therefore, the taper angle of the thru-holes is increased, resulting in larger inlet and smaller outlet diameters. The taper angle can be ignored for a thin glass substrate prepared by using the laser drilling method. For drilling of a thick substrate, the taper angle can increase. Reduction of the taper angle by minimizing the recast layer can be achieved when the drilling starts from the bottom of the transparent substrate. Minimizing the taper angle of the thru-hole in silica and soda-lime glass substrates can be achieved without the laser beam being blocked by ablated materials.15-17 Previous studies15-17 have investigated the formation of microsized channels and holes via laser drilling. However, no work has been performed on drilling large-sized holes in transparent glass substrates from the bottom. In this work, the helical laser drilling method is adopted to drill a hole from the bottom of a transparent glass substrate with a thickness of 400 μm. The aim is to investigate the relationship between the helical laser drilling parameters by machining an ASG substrate. Theoretical analysis was performed and then confirmed by experimental results. The laser drilling parameters, such as laser power, scanning speed, layer pitch, and vertical motion speed on the glass surface, were considered to find a correlation. The machining conditions can be estimated by this correlation. An experiment using the machining parameters obtained from the correlation was performed to confirm the theoretical work. High geometrical accuracy and good quality of the sidewalls for the thru-holes can be achieved by appropriately selected parameters from the correlation. 2. Experiments 2.1 Laser helical drilling procedure Experiment system were developed to drill larger-diameter holes in the 400 μm-thick ASG (Corning Co., Gorilla glass®) by irradiating a laser pulse of 800 fs at a wavelength of 1552 nm with a laser beam diameter of 6 μm, as can be seen in Fig. 1(a). The maximum pulse energy of the laser was 30 μJ, and the maximum pulse repetition frequency was 660 kHz. These glass substrates were positioned in the direction normal to the incoming laser pulse under ambient conditions on the top surface. The bottom surface was placed in water for cooling and removing the glass particles, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The laser energy irradiated onto the substrates was measured by an optical power meter before an experiment. The laser-drilled surface morphology and the quality of the holes were evaluated using a confocal laser scanning microscope (Olympus Co., LEXT OLS 4100 model). This measuring system had sufficient resolution (10 nm) to observe the surface Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of (a) the femtosecond laser system and (b) the laser helical drilling method starting from the bottom surface of the glass substrate

[PAGE 3] INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRECISION ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURING Vol. 18, No. 7 JULY 2017 / 925 morphology. The laser helical drilling process is shown in Fig. 2. The starting point of the drilling is located under the bottom surface of the ASG substrate. The bottom surface is adjacent to a water flow system to remove the ablated materials,16 as shown in Fig. 2(a). As seen in Figs. 2(b), (c), and (d), the laser scanning beam path simultaneously moves in a circular motion normal to the bottom surface of the substrate and in the direction of the positive z-axis. Consequently, the laser beam follows the helical path from the bottom to the top surface of the ASG substrate in the positive z-axis direction to cut along the edge of the thru-hole. This laser beam path was programmed by a laser scanning controller. In order to remove the circular off-cut part completely without any additional breaking force, the moving distance in the positive z-axis direction was 700 μm, which sufficiently exceeded the 400 μm thickness of the glass substrate, as presented in Fig. 3(a). The water flow was stopped momentarily before complete penetration of the hole to prevent overflow of the water onto the top surface of the ASG substrate, as shown in Fig. 2(c). In the final step shown in Fig. 2(d), the circular off-cut part inside the helical beam path can be completely detached downward. 2.2 Laser processing parameters The important helical drilling parameters of the adopted laser system are laser power, frequency, scanning speed, and vertical moving speed. In particular, the helical layer pitch is the critical parameter to determine the penetration and the quality of the thru-holes. If the helical layer pitch is larger than the ablation depth of each layer, each layer will not be connected and the off-cut part will not be completely removed. Additionally, laser irradiation should be stopped after the z-axis Fig. 2 Process diagram of the laser helical drilling method Fig. 3 Laser helical drilling parameters

[PAGE 4] 926 / JULY 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRECISION ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURING Vol. 18, No. 7 motion stops. Otherwise the top layer of the glass will be irradiated by the laser. This irradiation results in micro-cracks and chippings around the edge of the hole by the formation of a thermally affected zone in the edge regions. For these reasons, it is important to determine the appropriate layer pitches and the z-axis motion speed with regard to the ablation depth of the ASG substrate. The laser beam paths of the laser helical drilling process are presented in Fig. 3. The moving distance along the z-axis should be longer than the glass thickness, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The ditch distance corresponds to the distance from the outer edges to the off-cut parts in Fig. 3(b). The beam spot is sufficiently overlapped and determined by the laser frequency and the beam spot size, as shown in Fig. 3(c). Table 1 presents the helical drilling parameters used for the experiments. 3. Results and Discussion The layer pitch of the helical beam path in the vertical z-axis direction is determined by the ablation depth. The ablation depth (Ldepth) that is formed when the laser energy ranges from 10 μJ to 28.3 μJ can be obtained by Eq. (1): , (1) where Fth, Fa, and α are the ablation threshold laser fluence, the incident fluence, and absorption coefficient, respectively. The ablation threshold laser fluence (Fth) of the ASG was experimentally determined to be 2.4 J/cm2 by the D2 method, as shown in Fig. 4.18,19 In the ablation of the glass substrate by the femtosecond laser, the absorption coefficient (α) was determined by the diffusion length of conduction band free electrons (CBEs).20 The CBE diffusion occurs in 950 fs, which is the summation of the pulse duration (800 fs) and the CBE lifetime (150 fs). The CBE lifetime corresponds to the required time for the recombination of excited electrons and holes. Consequently, the diffusion length of CBEs is found to be 950 nm with a CBE velocity of O(1 nm/fs). According to this theoretical analysis, the calculated ablation depth with an incident laser fluence of 106 J/cm2 is approximately 3.6 μm. The required number of helical path layers (N) can be calculated to be approximately 200 layers using a z-axis moving distance of 700 μm divided by the ablation depth of 3.6 μm. For complete penetration of the hole, a large number of laser shots is necessary so that each ablation has to be overlapped between helical layers. The depth of ablated craters in the ASG substrates linearly increased by approximately 1.5 μm with five consecutive shots in similar laser fluence ranges.21 At a scanning speed of 800 mm/s and a maximum laser repetition frequency of 660 kHz, a maximum of five laser shots can be overlapped with a 1.2 μm gap between laser spots and a beam spot size of 6 μm, as shown in Fig. 3(c). At perimeter scanning speeds greater than 800 mm/s, the ablation craters cannot be connected. The number of overlapped shots is decreased as the distance between laser spots is increased. Therefore, the ablation depth is decreased. In contrast, at scanning speeds less than 800 mm/s, the ablation craters of helical layers are connected because the number of multi-shots and the ablation depth are increased. According to the calculated results, scanning speeds of 500 mm/s and 600 mm/s have six and eight overlapped shots, respectively. The difference in the ablation depths is not significant. At the lowest scanning speed of 100 mm/s in this laser system, the ablation depth can be increased significantly because 40 overlapped shots are required. The drilling time is 8 times longer when compared to that of the scanning speed of 800 mm/s. Therefore, this scanning speed of 800 mm/s was appropriate and effective for connecting and overlapping between helical layers. The ditch distance (Ld) is necessary for the smooth emission of removed materials as presented in Fig. 3(b). In this experiment, the ditch distance of 30 μm is determined in the scanning program. This means the diameter of the laser path is decreased with the rotation period of five revolutions because the spot size (Ф) of 6 μm can cover the ditch distance of 30 μm. The total scanning distance (Lscan) of the laser beam can be calculated using the following equation: , (2) where a is the coefficient for the sufficient moving distance along the z-axis direction over the thickness of the glass substrate (t). If the diameter (D) of the thru-hole is 1 mm, the total scanning distance (Lscan) of the helical moving path would be approximately 3100 mm. Finally, the scanning time can be calculated to be approximately 4 s at the chosen scanning speed of 800 mm/s by using the following simple equation: . (3) To obtain laser-drilled edges without cracks and chippings, laser Ldepth α 1 – Fa/Fth ( ) ln = Lscan NπDLd /φ atπDLd / φα 1 – Fa/Fth ( ) ln { } = = Tscan Lscan /Vscan = Table 1 Laser helical drilling parameters used for experiments Parameters Values Laser beam diameter 6 μm Laser frequency 660 kHz Energy 10-28.3 μJ Scanning speed (Perimeter speed) 800 mm/s Z axis moving speed 0.1-0.3 mm/s Z axis moving distance Glass thickness × 1.75 Water Flowing Fig. 4 Ablation threshold fluence of aluminosilicate glass as determined by the D2 method

[PAGE 5] INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRECISION ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURING Vol. 18, No. 7 JULY 2017 / 927 scanning and z-axis motion should stop simultaneously (Tscan = Tz). Accordingly, the appropriate speed of the z-axis motion (Vapp_z) can be obtained as approximately 0.18 mm/s using Eq. (4). . (4) Finally, the Vapp_z at various laser energies can be obtained. As the incident laser energy is increased, the ablation depth is increased, and the number of helical layers can be decreased. Therefore, the thru-holes can be obtained with higher moving speeds along the z-axis. Additionally, if the speed of z-axis motion is lower than Vapp_z, the surface quality will be improved because the helical layer pitch is decreased and the ablation depth of each helical layer can be sufficiently connected. In order to verify this proposed correlation between the parameters, experiments were carried out by varying Vz with different laser energies. The starting value of Vz for the experiments is obtained by Eq. (4). In the experimental results shown in Fig. 5, the difference between the calculated value and the experimental value was less than 0.01 mm/s. The surface morphology of the thru-hole at Vapp_z and above Vapp_z with different laser energies is shown in Fig. 6. The thru-holes can be obtained with Vapp_z, as seen in Fig. 6 (left figures). Only the removed glass particles were observed around the edges of the thru-holes without any cracks and chippings, as shown in Fig. 7 (first figure). In contrast, more of the off-cut parts inside the laser beam path remained at faster speeds (right column) than Vapp_z (left column), as seen in Fig 6. The heat affected zone (HAZ), cracks, and large chippings were observed in Fig. 7 (second figure, third figure). This is due to the ablation depth of each helical layer not being sufficiently connected, and so the water flow could not reach the top of the glass through the drilled helical path. As a result, the ablated glass particles could not be extracted and the glass has been affected by excessive thermal accumulation. Figs. 8 and 9 show the surface quality of the cross section for each drilling condition. There are no chippings in the cross section with the Vapp_Z at/Tz Vscan ∅α 1 – Fa/Fth ( )/πDLd ln = = Fig. 5 Experimental results of Vapp_z for the thru-holes Fig. 6 Top view of thru-holes with varying laser energies Fig. 7 Edge quality around the holes with each drilling condition

[PAGE 6] 928 / JULY 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRECISION ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURING Vol. 18, No. 7 drilling conditions of Vapp_z, as seen in Fig. 8. Additionally, traces of the helical layers were not observed. This indicates that the layer pitch was long enough to connect and overlap the ablation depths between layers. Fig. 9 shows the sidewall of the thru-holes when Vz is higher than Vapp_z. At higher Vapp_z, the surface roughness of the cross section was increased. Due to the speed being faster than Vapp_z, the layer pitch of the laser helical beam path was larger than the ablation depth and each layer was not connected. Consequently, the traces that were irregularly chipped off inside the glass were observed in the cross-sectional view. The geometrical accuracy of the thru-holes, including the hole diameter and the taper angle, is shown in Fig. 10. The roundness accuracy of the thru-hole was less than ± 20 μm. These results indicate that the taper angle was small in the thru-hole. To validate the theoretical correlation between the drilling parameters obtained by Eq. (4), additional experiments were carried out on thru-holes with diameters of 0.5, 2, and 3 mm. Fig. 11 shows the shape of the thru-hole at the calculated Vapp_z for each hole diameter. From Eq. (4), Vz is 0.1, 0.35, and 0.6 mm/s for the thru-hole diameters of 0.5, 2, and 3 mm, respectively. Some glass particles are adhered around the hole edge. However, there are no chippings, cracks, or HAZ seen in the surface morphology of each condition. 4. Conclusions This research presented a new femtosecond laser helical drilling method for a 400 μm-thick ASG substrate by machining from the bottom of the substrate. Machining parameter correlations were derived in order to select appropriate machining conditions. In particular, the ablation depth and the helical layer pitch were found to be the critical drilling parameters to determine the penetration and the surface quality of the thru-holes. The mathematical relation between the drilling parameters was investigated in detail by comparing it to experimental results with regard to the roundness accuracy, taper angle, surface roughness of the cross section, and quality of the thru-holes. The off-cut parts inside the laser beam path were not completely Fig. 8 Cross section views of thru-holes in each Vapp_z Fig. 9 Surface morphology and average roughness due to variation of the speed of z-axis movement at the laser energy Fig. 10 (a) Thru-hole shape from the top and bottom views and (b) the measured results of the thru-hole diameters