[PAGE 1] Full length article Dual-directional ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser drilling of film cooling holes Zhengjie Fan a,b,*, Zhiming Pei a,b, Zukun She c, Wenjun Wang a,b, Yingjie Yan a,b, Jianlei Cui a,b a School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China b State Key Laboratory for Precision Micro-Nano Manufacturing Technologies, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710054, China c AECC Guiyang Engine Design Reserch Institute, Guiyang 550081, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Ultrasonic vibration Femtosecond laser drilling Film cooling holes Superalloy Taper control A B S T R A C T Film cooling technology is essential for ensuring the prolonged and stable operation of turbine blades in high- temperature environments in aircraft engines. This study systematically explored the use of ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser composite processing technology for machining film cooling holes, con- ducting extensive research and innovation in this important field. The movement and evolution of debris under dual-directional ultrasonic vibration were investigated using a simulation model. A multi-parameter cooperative regulation mechanism was proposed to optimize the ultrasonic-assisted femtosecond laser drilling process. This approach significantly improved the machining quality and efficiency of film cooling holes in nickel-based su- peralloys. The study systematically investigated the effects of ultrasonic vibration direction and amplitude on hole depth, taper, and wall deposition at various drilling stages. The experimental results showed that the ul- trasonic vibration-assisted technology increased the processing efficiency of blind holes and through-holes by approximately 12 % and 19 %, respectively. Notably, when machining inclined holes, the dual-directional ul- trasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser technology demonstrated significantly greater improvements in both quality and efficiency. This technology reduced the percentage of oxygen atoms by 26.9 %, and the surface roughness (Ra) by 21 %, achieving a depth-to-diameter ratio of 6.6:1 and a surface roughness (Ra) of 3.2 μm, significantly improving the machining results. This study not only demonstrates the potential application of ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser drilling technology in the machining of film cooling holes for aviation engines but also provides detailed process optimization and cooperative control strategies. These innovative results offer robust technical support for further enhancing the performance of aviation engines. 1. Introduction The temperature of the thermal component in an aircraft engine plays a pivotal role in determining the engine’s thrust-weight ratio. In contemporary aero-engines, the turbine front temperature has exceeded 2000 K [1,2], while the current state-of-the-art fourth-generation single- crystal alloy can withstand temperatures of up to 1450 K [3]. To bridge this temperature gap, film cooling hole technology has emerged as the predominant solution. This technology involves the injection of cold air into the combustion chamber to shield engine components from high- temperature gases, thereby extending the service life of turbine blades [4,5]. As aviation technology advances, the precise and efficient machining of film cooling holes with a large depth-to-diameter ratio has become an increasingly important aspect of aero-engine manufacturing. Laser processing, which uses the photothermal effect to remove materials [6], offers several advantages. These characteristics establish laser processing as a promising technology for film cooling hole machining. However, nanosecond and picosecond laser pulses present challenges in certain laser applications. They can lead to the formation of recast layers and micro-cracks due to the interaction of the plasma plume and molten material with the hole walls [7], ultimately affecting the longevity of engine components. In contrast, ultra-short pulse lasers, characterized by pulse durations shorter than the electron–phonon relaxation time, enable material removal through plasma eruption after extensive ionization, with minimal micro-cracks or recast layers. M.R. Shcherbakov et al. [8,9] conducted experiments on drilling through * Corresponding author. E-mail address: fanzhengjie@xjtu.edu.cn (Z. Fan). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics and Laser Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optlastec https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2024.111484 Received 28 March 2024; Received in revised form 17 June 2024; Accepted 15 July 2024 Optics & Laser Technology 180 (2025) 111484 Available online 23 July 2024 0030-3992/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

[PAGE 2] holes in single-crystal alloys and TBCs-coated single-crystal superalloys using a femtosecond laser and confirmed the absence of recast layers and cracks in the machined area or at the coating/matrix interface. High- power ultra-short pulse lasers have been explored to enhance the depth-to-diameter ratio of film cooling holes, mitigate plasma shielding, and improve processing quality and efficiency. However, challenges arise when using lasers with a high energy density and repetition frequency. These issues arise as a result of plasma shielding and heat accumulation effects during machining, which limits the depth of laser-drilled holes and reduces machining quality. Sun et al. [10] and Tang et al. [11,12] observed that as the length of laser pro- cessing time increases, so does the energy density and repetition fre- quency, resulting in severe plasma plume shielding and reduced processing efficiency. Gruner et al. [13] compared morphologies of holes drilled at different energy densities (15.2–30.5 J•cm−2) and repetition frequencies. They found irregularities in the inlet morphology of the holes drilled at high energy densities and the formation of burrs. At high repetition frequencies (100 kHz), numerous molten particles form near the entrance of the hole. Xu et al. [14] used molecular dy- namics simulations to study plasma shielding during femtosecond laser ablation, observing that higher energy density lasers increase plasma plume shielding, which harms the processing quality. To address these challenges, researchers have introduced auxiliary processing techniques in addition to optimizing laser parameters. These auxiliary techniques include airflow assistance, liquid assistance, and ultrasonic assistance. Airflow assists in dispersing molten material, metal vapor, and plasma plumes during laser drilling, reducing the formation of microcracks or recast layers. However, it is hard to elimi- nate debris accumulated at the bottom of deep holes [15]. The use of liquid for heat dissipation and debris removal is beneficial, but it causes significant laser energy loss, impeding deep hole processing. Ren et al. [16] proposed a backside water-assisted process that expedited debris discharge without substantial laser energy loss, manifesting it as suitable for ultra-short pulse laser machining. However, ultrasonic assistance enhances heat convection between the workpiece and the surrounding air, facilitating debris removal without lowering the laser beam’s en- ergy. This technology provides an effective method for laser drilling of high-quality film cooling holes. Several studies have explored the benefits of ultrasonic assistance in laser machining. For instance, Alavi et al. [17–21] combined ultrasonic vibration with continuous laser drilling and investigated the melt in- jection process during laser ablation. Their findings indicated that ultrasonic-assisted laser ablation significantly increases melt ejection from the melt pool, resulting in enhanced processing quality and effi- ciency. Wang et al. [22,23] conducted experiments involving ultrasonic- assisted laser machining. Their results demonstrated that this approach promoted the injection of melt, reduced heat-affected zone thickness, and diminished recast layer formation, ultimately enhancing the depth of blind holes. These studies demonstrate that ultrasound-assisted laser machining technology has the potential to improve machining quality. Kim et al. [24] introduced ultrasonic vibration into nanosecond laser processing and demonstrated that it effectively cooled the plasma- heated air, improving heat transfer efficiency and laser processing effi- ciency. Kang et al. [25] integrated ultrasonic vibration with a repetition frequency of 30 kHz into nanosecond laser drilling, and the results indicated that vertical ultrasonic vibration can more quickly cool plasma-heated air, reduce particle adhesion, and inhibit recast layer formation. These studies show that the combination of ultrasonic vi- bration and laser can produce high-quality drilling. However, research on ultrasound-assisted femtosecond laser pro- cessing is relatively limited. Zheng et al. [26] and Xia et al. [27] pro- posed a technique that uses a femtosecond laser-assisted by ultrasonic vibration to conduct drilling experiments, which revealed improve- ments in hole wall finish and depth-to-diameter ratio, effectively improving machining quality and processing efficiency. Additionally, Park et al. [28] employed an ultrasonic vibrating lens in femtosecond laser drilling, which reduced burr formation at hole entrances, lowered the wall roughness of the hole, and enhanced depth-to-diameter ratios. Yang et al. [29] observed the plasma with a high-speed camera, revealing the mechanism of plasma shielding or spattering during laser ablation. They discovered that the improvement of efficiency in double burst mode is caused by melting sputtering and sputtering of molten material from the surface. Wang et al. [30,31] improved the simulation model of laser processing by incorporating temperature-dependent op- tical and thermophysical properties, as well as three phases of melting, vaporization, and phase explosion. They also proposed a model updating method that considers the influence of the ablation front process on laser absorption. However, the technology and mechanism of ultrasound- assisted femtosecond laser processing are still in the early stages of development. The influence of coupling parameters between dual-directional ul- trasonic vibration and femtosecond laser on the micro-hole character- istics has yet to be investigated. This study investigated the mechanism of drilling film cooling holes with an ultrasonic-assisted femtosecond laser, focusing on the dynamics of debris particles. The study proposed an innovative high-quality and high-efficiency drilling method that utilizes a dual-directional ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser. The coupling effects of ultrasonic assistance at different stages of femtosecond laser drilling were analyzed, thereby contributing to the progress of film cooling hole drilling technology. 2. Experimental 2.1. Experimental material A nickel-based superalloy (GH4169) measuring 30 mm × 20 mm × 3 mm was utilized for ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser drilling experiments. The specific chemical composition of the superal- loy is listed in Table 1. 2.2. Experimental equipment The schematic and the experimental equipment of the ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser processing system are illustrated in Fig. 1. Detailed laser parameters are listed in Table 2. The beam from the Yb:YAG femtosecond laser (Light Conversion, PHAROS) is polarized from linear to circular using a quarter-wave plate. After divergence angle modulation by a beam expander, the laser beam traverses the scanning mirror and converges on the workpiece surface. The three- dimensional ultrasonic vibration platform, energized by the ultrasonic generator, imparts differential electrical power to the transducer, con- verting it into ultrasonic wave energy and causing triaxial vibration along the X, Y, and Z axes. The experiment uses a field lens to focus a laser pulse with a wave- length of 1030 nm and 400 μJ energy. The control system ensures pre- cise displacement of samples on the three-axis motion platform. The scanning mirror, controlled by Z-axis rotation, governs the scanning path and speed, facilitating adjustment of the laser focus position through Z-axis movement and changing the laser emission direction via A-axis rotation. The ultrasonic vibration platform, which is mounted on the X-Y plane of the three-dimensional motion platform, permits dy- namic modification of the workpiece’s processing location by control- ling movement along the X and Y axes. 2.3. Experimental process Prior to the laser drilling experiments, the specimens were thor- oughly cleaned in dehydrated alcohol using an ultrasonic cleaner for 10 min, followed by drying. The thickness of each sample was measured using a Vernier caliper. Following the laser drilling process, cross- sections of the drilled holes were intricately prepared through Z. Fan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 180 (2025) 111484 2

[PAGE 3] grinding and polishing, followed by ultrasonic cleaning to ensure the pristine condition of the specimens. In this paper, the “machining entry” refers to the orifice formed on the surface of the material where the laser first contacts and starts machining, and the “machining exit” refers to the outlet formed when the laser penetrates the material and leaves the surface of the material. The equivalent exit radius in ultrasonic-assisted machining is defined as the exit radius that ignores the effect of ultrasonic in blind hole machining until the orifice is saturated. The study began with a thor- ough exploration of parameters in ultrasonic vibration-assisted femto- second laser drilling. We optimized laser power, pulse frequency, scanning speed, ultrasonic vibration frequency, and vibration ampli- tude. Experimentation revealed that parameter adjustments can signif- icantly improve drilling efficiency and quality. Building upon this foundation, the femtosecond laser processing parameters were system- atically refined to elucidate their impact on minimizing debris deposi- tion at the hole entrance and optimizing hole roundness. Then blind hole machining was conducted, and the depth of blind holes processed in the same time period was used as a benchmark for processing efficiency. The study explored how varying ultrasonic amplitudes in vertical and hori- zontal directions affect processing efficiency, entrance morphology, roundness, diameter, and taper. Furthermore, the study scrutinized the influence of laser processing time and ultrasonic vibration on processing efficiency, hole wall morphology, and processing quality. The research also examined processing quality and efficiency during through-hole machining under different processing durations. Finally, blind hole machining was conducted using optimal parameters, with the same exit diameter as the drilled through-hole under the same processing time serving as a performance benchmark. The study concluded with a comprehensive summary of the mechanism of dual-directional ultrasonic vibration in drilling. After drilling, the holes were cleaned with acetone in an ultrasonic cleaner. The Keyence VHX digital microscope facilitated preliminary observation of hole morphology, diameter, and depth in the captured area. The OLS4000 laser confocal microscope was then employed to measure the axial line roughness of film cooling hole walls. Subse- quently, a color map of the film hole entrance wall was generated. The SU3500 tungsten filament scanning electron microscope was used to conduct a thorough investigation of hole morphology and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Post-processing stages involved grinding and polishing using a specialized machine, followed by ultrasonic cleaning to eliminate any residual traces on hole entrances and walls, ensuring an accurate and pristine characterization of hole morphology. Finally, simulations were conducted to validate the experimental findings. A COMSOL-based model was developed to simulate debris particle motion during ultrasonic vibration. The simulations revealed intricate relationships among debris particle discharge efficiency, hole depth, ultrasonic vibration, and direction. The study systematically investigated the regulatory mechanisms of the ultrasonic field on debris particle motion behavior by simulating their movement under different ultrasonic field parameters. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. The coupled influence of ultrasound vibration direction and amplitude on hole Machining 3.1.1. Vertical ultrasonic vibration This experiment systematically investigates the influence of vertical ultrasonic vibration on the dimensional characteristics and morphology Table 1 Chemical Composition of GH4169Nickel-Based SuperaAlloy. Alloy Grade Percentage composition of chemical elements GH4169 Cr Ni Mo Al Ti Nb Fe 17.0–21.0 50–55.0 2.80–3.30 0.30–0.70 0.75–1.15 4.75–5.50 Remaining portion C Co Mn Si P S Cu ≤0.08 ≤1.0 ≤0.35 ≤0.35 ≤0.015 ≤0.015 ≤0.30 Fig. 1. The schematic of the ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser processing system (a); The experimental equipment of the ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser processing system (b). Table 2 Detailed parameters for the experimental equipment. Parameter Wavelength /nm Maximum average power /W Repetition frequency /kHz Maximum monopulse energy /μJ Pulse width /fs Optical quality （M2） parameter values 1030 20 200 400 120 1.3 Z. Fan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 180 (2025) 111484 3

[PAGE 4] of the hole wall. A rigorous analysis of the efficiency of ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser machining was conducted, with blind hole depth within a consistent time frame serving as the bench- mark for efficiency evaluation. The experimental parameters included a laser single-pulse energy of 400 μJ, a repetition frequency of 25 kHz, linearly polarized light for concentric circular path scanning (ring diameter of 400 μm and concentric circle spacing of 30 μm), a scanning speed of 200 mm/s, and a defocusing distance of 2 mm. The blind hole machining time was set at 30 s, while the through-hole machining time was set at 120 s, with the ultrasonic amplitude in the range of 0–40 μm. In the experiment, the accurate correspondence between the output power and amplitude of the ultrasound device is utilized. The ultrasound amplitude is precisely controlled by adjusting the output power of the ultrasound device to ensure the accuracy of the experimental results. The variation of drilling depths with increasing ultrasonic amplitude is illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The hole depth increases with ultrasonic amplitude, which is attributed to the increased efficiency of debris particle emission. When the ultrasonic amplitude reached 40 μm, the depth was maximized, resulting in the highest machining efficiency (approximately 14 % higher than without ultrasonic assistance). How- ever, as the ultrasonic amplitude increased, so did the generated heat, resulting in a thermal overload in the ultrasonic device. Consequently, for optimal machining efficiency and thermal considerations, an ultra- sonic amplitude of 28 μm is recommended. To prevent thermal overload in the ultrasonic device due to excessive amplitude, an ultrasonic amplitude of 28 μm was selected after several trials and adjustments. Furthermore, the holes exhibit a tapered wall. This is due to the Gaussian distribution of the femtosecond laser beam, which has a certain diver- gence angle and thus removes varying amounts of material at different depths. Additionally, the ablation products absorb and scatter the laser, causing a decrease in laser energy and a reduction in the diameter of the micro-holes with increasing depth, thereby forming an asymmetric taper. By adjusting the working parameters of ultrasonic vibration and laser processing parameters, the asymmetric taper angle of the hole wall was minimized to achieve more uniform material removal and more symmetrical hole wall morphology. The entrance radius and perforation shape after 2 min of machining, as well as the roundness of holes under different ultrasonic amplitudes are depicted in Fig. 2(b). When using ultrasonic, some debris accumu- lated at the entrance, but a part of the notch has been repaired, as indicated by a yellow box in Fig. 2(b). The shape of the hole wall has improved. However, the vertical direction vibration has a limited effect on removing particle deposition on the hole wall, as shown a the red box in Fig. 2(b). Due to the predominant role of the laser during the initial drilling stage, the entrance radius and roundness remain unchanged. However, the exit radius of the through-hole increased while the taper of the hole decreased, resulting in higher machining efficiency. The roundness of the hole is calculated based on the ratio of the short-axis length to the long-axis length of the orifice. 3.1.2. Horizontal direction ultrasonic vibration The parameters for this experiment included a laser single-pulse energy of 400 μJ, a repetition frequency of 25 kHz, a scanning speed of 200 mm/s, and a defocusing distance of 2 mm. Other parameters remained consistent with the previous experiments. The blind hole machining time was set to 30 s, and the influence of horizontal ultra- sonic amplitude on the drilling efficiency was investigated. Fig. 3(a) presents results from 30 s machining with varying ultra- sonic amplitudes, displaying the depth of blind holes and the entrance morphology of holes. Additionally, magnified images of the wall morphology at ultrasonic amplitudes of 0 μm and 40 μm are also shown. The horizontal ultrasonic vibration causes negligible changes in hole depth, exit radius, and roundness, while machining efficiency remains nearly constant. In the absence of ultrasonic vibration, a notable accu- mulation of debris particles was observed on the hole wall, outlined by the red box in Fig. 3(a). However, the horizontal direction ultrasonic vibration resulted in less debris adhesion on the hole wall and a signif- icant decrease in surface irregularities, improving machining quality. Notably, at an amplitude of 40 μm, the hole wall had minimal debris adhesion, as shown by the blue box in Fig. 3(a). This highlights the positive impact of ultrasonic assistance on laser drilling. 3.2. The mechanism of ultrasonic vibration in holes of various depths To investigate the impact of ultrasonic vibration on holes of varying depths, different laser processing parameters were used to process shallow holes and deep holes. The blind hole depth and through-hole exit diameter served as benchmarks for efficiency. The experiment involved varying laser processing time and the presence of ultrasonic vibration while maintaining other parameters constant. The vertical ultrasonic amplitude was set to 28 μm and machining times were sys- tematically taken at 15 s, 30 s, and 60 s. The hole depths and morphology under different laser processing time are illustrated in Fig. 3(b). The study revealed that ultrasonic vi- bration had negligible effects on the depth and machining efficiency of shallow-hole machining. However, in deep-hole machining, ultrasonic vibration began to play a significant role, leading to improved efficiency. Particularly, at a drilling time of 60 s, the depth of the laser-drilled hole without ultrasonic vibration reached 2.5 mm. However, ultrasonic vi- bration resulted in an increase in depth by approximately 270 μm, representing an enhancement of approximately 12 %. Additionally, the funnel-shaped cross-section of the holes, shown in Fig. 3(b), is the result of the combined effects of the Gaussian energy distribution of the laser, the material removal mechanism, and the impact of shock waves and plasma effects generated during the processing. Vertical ultrasonic vi- bration significantly increases the depth of blind holes by improving Fig. 2. The depths (a), and the entry radius and roundness (b) of the holes as a function of the ultrasonic amplitude. Z. Fan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 180 (2025) 111484 4

[PAGE 5] debris removal efficiency and enhancing material removal. Fig. 3(c) and 3(d) show the variation of exit radius and equivalent exit radius of through-holes for various laser processing time, respec- tively. The machining times were set to 2, 3, and 4 min, while other parameters remained consistent with the aforementioned conditions. The through-hole exit radius increased with ultrasonic vibration compared to without ultrasonic assistance, resulting in enhanced effi- ciency. In the second minute, the equivalent exit radius increased from 80 μm to 97 μm, representing an increase of approximately 21 %. If the change rate of the exit radius over time was the same with or without ultrasonic until the exit radius saturated (Ignoring the improvement in efficiency due to ultrasonic between 2–3 min), the variation of the equivalent exit radius was plotted, as shown in Fig. 3(d). The exit radius saturates at 2.6 min with ultrasonic vibration. In contrast, without ul- trasonic vibration, the exit radius saturates at 3.1 min, with efficiency improving by 19 %. Assuming that, prior to saturation, the rate of change in equivalent exit radius with time was the same with and without ultrasonic assis- tance, the equivalent exit radius saturated at 3.1 min without ultrasonic assistance and 2.6 min with ultrasonic assistance. The ultrasonic vi- bration increased the saturation of the through-hole exit radius by 0.5 min, leading to an approximately 19 % improvement in efficiency. In both conditions with and without ultrasonic assistance, holes were machined for 2, 3, and 4 min, and the exit morphology and wall morphology are illustrated in Fig. 4. Ultrasonic vibration maintained a nearly constant hole entrance diameter of 484 μm. For 2 min, the exit radius of holes increased, and the taper angle decreased from 6.18◦to 5.53◦. However, for 3 and 4 min, the exit radius of the holes was almost identical to the condition without ultrasonic assistance. The deposition layer and adhesion on the hole did not change significantly with the ultrasonic vibration, but the exit diameter was maximized earlier, indicating that ultrasonic had a greater effect in the deep hole stage and improved the roundness of the exit as the machining time increased. 3.3. The impact of Dual-Directional ultrasonic vibration on the inclined hole Dual-directional ultrasonic vibration-assisted femtosecond laser drilling was achieved by applying vertical ultrasonic vibration on the inclined holes. The inclined hole was fabricated by tilting the laser at 30◦ through the rotation of the laser scanning mirror around the A-axis. Dual-directional ultrasonic vibration was implemented by decomposing the vibration into two directions: along the hole axis and perpendicular to the hole axis. The amplitude of the ultrasonic vibration was 28 μm, with machining durations of 4, 5, and 6 min. Fig. 5 depicts the exit radius as a function of processing time. The hole exit radius is consistently greater with ultrasonic than without it. Notably, the equivalent exit radii for ultrasonic at 4 min and non- ultrasonic at 5 min were both 65 μm. This indicated that ultrasonic vi- bration shortened the hole machining process by approximately 1 min, increasing the machining efficiency. Fig. 6 depicts the entrance and exit morphology of holes, as well as magnified views of the hole walls. The entry radius and roundness of holes remained unchanged, with the short-axis diameter of the entrance measuring approximately 526 μm. The deposition layer and adhesion on the hole wall increased with machining time, as indicated by the red boxes in Fig. 6(a) and (c). As shown in Fig. 6(r-t), the hole exit diameter enlarged with the ultrasonic vibration, leading to improved machining efficiency. After 6 min of machining, the taper angle decreased from 5.72◦to 4.30◦. The deposition layer and adhesion on the hole wall decreased, enhancing machining quality, as shown in Fig. 6(h-j). The magnified view of the hole wall for the 6-minute machining revealed a significant reduction in deposition layer and adhesion with ultrasonic assistance, improving the quality of the hole wall, as shown in Fig. 6(m, n). The entrance, exit, and hole wall of vertical and 30◦inclined film cooling holes processed under optimal parameters were depicted in Fig. 7(a-f). With ultrasonic vibration, the entrance short-axis radius of 30◦inclined film cooling holes was 263 μm, the exit radius was 132 μm, Fig. 3. The entry radius of blind holes with different ultrasonic amplitudes (a), the depths of blind holes versus processing time (b), the exit radius of through holes versus processing time (c), and the equivalent exit radius of through holes processing time (d). Z. Fan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 180 (2025) 111484 5

[PAGE 6] the hole depth was 3464 μm, the taper angle was 4.3◦, and the depth-to- diameter ratio was 6.6:1. Similarly, the entrance radius of vertical film cooling holes was 242 μm, the exit was 120 μm, the hole depth was 3000 μm, the taper angle was approximately 4.66◦, and the depth-to-diameter ratio was 6.2:1. The metallographic images, magnified views of the hole wall, and EDS element analysis of vertically and inclined film cooling holes are presented in Fig. 7(g-p). The quality of the vertical hole was comparable to those without ultrasonic, with residual adhesions on the hole wall. EDS analysis of machined (area A2) and unprocessed (area B2) holes are shown in Fig. 7(o) and (p), respectively. Area B2 has no oxygen ele- ments, whereas area A2 has an oxygen atomic percentage of 52 %, indicating the presence of adhesions on the hole wall. The entrance hole wall of the film cooling hole obtained with a 50 × confocal microscope is shown in Fig. 7(i), with Ra≈8.0 μm. The adhesion on the hole wall was significantly reduced as a result of the dual-directional ultrasonic compared to vertically drilled holes. Dual-directional ultrasonic can accelerate the debris particle removal through vertical vibration and densify the material surface through horizontal vibration. Under the coupling effect of laser, dual-directional ultrasonic changes the contact response between the debris and the hole wall, thus affecting the adhesion behavior of the debris. EDS analysis of machining area A1 and unprocessed area B1 of the hole was presented in Fig. 7(l) and (m). There were no oxygen elements in area B1, but the oxygen atomic percentage was 38 % in area A1, indicating a decrease in hole-wall adhesions. Fig. 7(h) shows an image of area C2 of the entrance Fig. 4. Exit (a)-(f) and hole wall morphology (g)-(l) and their magnified images (m)-(r) of through-hole at different processing times with and without ultra- sound assistance. Z. Fan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 180 (2025) 111484 6