[PAGE 1] Thermal cycling tests of APS and SPS TBC systems on additively manufactured samples with cooling holes Martin Rüßmann a, Emine Bakan a, Daniel Mack a, Martin Tandler a, Robert Mücke a, Susanne Schrüfer b, Olivier Guillon a,c, Robert Vaßen a,d,* a Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Institute of Energy Materials and Devices (IMD), Material Synthesis and Processing (IMD-2), 52425, Jülich, Germany b Materials Engineering, Rolls-Royce Deutschland, 15827, Blankenfelde-Mahlow, Germany c Jülich Aachen Research Alliance (JARA-Energy), 52425, Jülich, Germany d Institut für Werkstoffe, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, Bochum, Germany A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Additively manufactured Cooling holes TBC Lifetime Furnace cycling tests A B S T R A C T In the field of aerospace engineering, the efficiency of cooling mechanisms in high-temperature turbine airfoils and combustion chamber walls of jet engines is of great significance. The utilization of cooling holes and thermal barrier coating systems (TBCs) is crucial in protecting these components from the effects of high-temperature combustion gases. Additive Layer Manufacturing (ALM) techniques have emerged as a promising method for the fabrication of more efficient cooling holes with sophisticated geometries. In this study, ALM button samples with and without cooling holes were coated with High-Velocity Oxygen Fuel (HVOF) CoNiCrAlY bond coats and partially Yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) top coats. The top coats were prepared by either suspension plasma spraying (SPS) or atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), using non-90◦spraying angles to avoid spraying directly into the cooling holes. Subsequent to this, the samples were exposed to thermal cycling in a furnace at 1100 ◦C, with the objective of comparing their lifetimes and failure mechanisms. The results indicated that the lifetime of the coatings was comparable when applied to samples with and without cooling holes, as well as when using APS and SPS. Stress concentrations that emerge at the complex hole structure appeared to be not critical for the lifetime under cyclic isothermal conditions, although they can in­ fluence the direction of preferred crack propagation. 1. Introduction Gas turbines play a pivotal role in a multitude of industrial appli­ cations. The efficiency and durability of these turbines are significantly influenced by the cooling mechanisms employed [1]. Cooling holes, in conjunction with thermal barrier coatings, are essential components in hot section components such as blades, vanes, or combustors in gas turbines. They serve to protect the nickel superalloy components from melting and the harsh operating environment, providing insulation against the high temperatures [2]. Cooling air is ejected through up to tens of thousands [3,4] of discrete holes with diameters in the range of millimeters to sub-millimeters onto the component surface, thereby reducing the convective heat transfer from the hot gas to the TBC [1]. Additionally, the low thermal conductivity of the TBC reduces the heat transfer by conduction. Consequently, higher firing temperatures and efficiency can be achieved. Traditionally, the manufacturing of cooling holes with intricate shapes involved complex machining processes such as electrochemical machining (ECM), electro-discharge machining (EDM) or laser drilling [5–7], which limited the design possibilities and often resulted in compromised cooling efficiency [4]. Cylindrical and fan-shaped holes are regarded as the most typical geometries [8]. Additive manufacturing, also known as 3D printing, has revolutionized this aspect by enabling the fabrication of components layer by layer, allowing for the creation of intricate cooling hole geometries with bow- shaped features that were once thought unattainable [9]. While additive manufacturing provides a significant leap forward in crafting intricate cooling holes, a new challenge arises when applying TBCs. The process of spraying TBCs onto components involves the application of a ceramic coating through a thermal spray method such as atmospheric plasma * Corresponding author at: Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Institute of Energy Materials and Devices (IMD), Material Synthesis and Processing (IMD-2), 52425 Jülich, Germany. E-mail address: r.vassen@fz-juelich.de (R. Vaßen). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Surface & Coatings Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/surfcoat https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2025.132864 Received 3 February 2025; Received in revised form 13 May 2025; Accepted 24 October 2025 Surface & Coatings Technology 518 (2025) 132864 Available online 27 October 2025 0257-8972/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

[PAGE 2] spraying (APS). In the case of cooling holes, there is a risk of blockage during the coating application, which would negatively impact the cooling air flow [8]. The challenge lies in ensuring uniform TBC coverage without compromising the functionality of the cooling holes and the lifetime. In the context of bow-shaped holes, the execution of after-spraying drilling or mechanical reopening procedures may present certain difficulties, given that e.g. a laser always drills in a straight line. One may also consider masking the cooling holes with polymers or metal shields prior to the application of the coating. However, the high tem­ peratures associated with plasma spraying, which would cause the material to melt, combined with the additional process steps, make this approach impractical. During operation, multilayered TBC systems comprising a ceramic top coat (TC), metallic bond coat (BC), and nickel superalloy substrate are subjected to repeated cycles of rapid heating and cooling during the start-up and shutdown of turbine engines, as well as prolonged exposure to elevated temperatures during cruise. [10]. These conditions can result in alterations to material properties, phase transitions, and microstruc­ tural changes, such as sintering in the ceramic top coat. The differing thermal expansion coefficients of the layers result in thermo-mechanical stresses, which can lead to the formation of large residual stresses at the cooling stage and subsequent crack formation, propagation, and even­ tual delamination of the ceramic top coat [10]. One method for testing the durability of the coatings is a furnace cycling test. In this test, samples are repeatedly heated and cooled with an extended dwell time at temperatures of for example 1100 ◦C. The extended dwell time at elevated temperatures facilitates the oxidation of the bond coat, which plays an important role in determining the longevity of the entire system [11]. The intermetallic MCrAlY (M = Ni, Co, Fe) alloys can be used as bond coat material. The rough surface of these materials provides adhesion to the top coat, but also leads to stress concentrations at the roughness peaks during thermal cycling and possible cracking in the top coat near the interface [12]. In addition, the processing method can affect the lifetime. The HVOF process can be used to spray adherent, dense coat­ ings [13,14] that can provide superior oxidation resistance compared to atmospheric plasma spraying (APS) under isothermal conditions [15]. Other studies have demonstrated that the anchoring of the TBC top coat can be limited due to a relatively smooth surface consisting of rounded features and the lack of fractal roughness on these undulations, which in turn can reduce the lifetime [16]. The β-NiAl phase in the bond coat serves as an aluminum reservoir [17,18], diffusing at the elevated temperature to the BC-TC interface and undergo oxidation with the hot incoming gases, which were transported through the porous ceramic top coat. Typically, a protective alpha aluminum oxide layer forms [19], with its growth depending on the temperature, time and aluminum supply. This process can be described by a parabolic law [20,21]. As the TGO grows and inter-diffuses with the substrate, the Al-rich phase β-NiAl dissolves, resulting in a change of the microstructure known as β-phase depletion. This depletion of aluminum eventually can lead to the local failure of the TGO, as fast-growing non-protective oxides such as chromia and spinels can form [22–24]. They facilitate the oxidation of the bond coat and increase the stresses in the top coat due to their volume expansion [25]. Due to the constrained volume expansion of the TGO and the CTE mismatch between the TGO and YSZ, large residual out-of-plane compressive stresses develop in the range of gigapascals, reaching their maximum at room temperature [19]. As the TGO thickens, it can lead to local separations and microcrack formation, which can coalesce into larger cracks, as described by Heeg et al. [26]. Moreover, the growth of the stiff TGO layer at the rough BC-TC interface facilitates crack propagation in the APS top coat in accordance with the “stress inversion theory” [27]. This occurs because the stress state in roughness valleys undergoes a transition from compressive to tensile stress, which allows cracks that originate on roughness tips to propagate towards the valleys [27]. Such cracks can coalesce and result in delamination and the failure of the TBC. The top coat typically consists of a 7–8 wt% yttria-stabilized zirconia layer, which provides thermal insulation, while also needing sufficient porosity to be stress compliant [28]. At elevated temperatures, stress relaxation occurs through the creep of both the bond coat and the ceramic layer [29,30]. This creep in APS coatings is believed to result also from an interlamellar sliding mechanism of individual splats at high temperatures [30–32]. It is assumed that this mechanism allows a kind of stress release even at room temperature [32]. Suspension Plasma Spraying (SPS) represents an alternative top coat processing method that provides a strain-tolerant columnar micro­ structure [33–35]. This microstructure has been demonstrated to exhibit longer lifetimes in furnace cycling tests compared to conventional APS TBCs. [35–39]. Furthermore, SPS has been shown to be an effective method for spraying on complex geometry parts [40] and for preventing the blockage of cooling holes [35,41]. However, there is a gap in the existing knowledge regarding the thermal cycling behavior of such SPS- TBC systems on substrates with holes. Cooling holes can be considered as surface irregularities, which may give rise to stress concentrations [42]. These concentrations arise, when there is a large stress gradient in a small, localized area due to local ir­ regularities such as scratches or cracks as well as abrupt changes in the geometry of the substrate including holes, notches, filets and corners [43]. The factors influencing stress concentration include a combination of geometric (hole shape, distance to neighboring hole), material, and the loading condition (uniaxial, biaxial, shear). These factors are typi­ cally tested when an external force is applied to the samples [44]. However, when a TBC system is sprayed on a sample with holes and then thermally cycled, no external force is applied. In this case, the CTE mismatch between the materials can result in strain and stress at the holes. The geometry of cooling holes plays a crucial role in inducing stress concentrations, as highlighted in studies such as in Jiang et al. (2017) [45]. The free edges at the holes will exhibit similar character­ istics to the edges of the samples, including stress concentrations normal (σz) to the BC-TC interface and shear stresses (τrθ) near the edges [45–52]. This can result in preferential crack propagation in these areas, delaminations or spallations of the ceramic coating. Jiang et al. [50] conducted furnace cycling tests on APS TBC systems sprayed on disks with different sized holes. Their findings indicated that surface cracks developed in the APS top coat and interfacial cracks started at the hole edges. The combination of both type of cracks resulted in local spallation around the hole and an overall reduction in the sample’s lifetime compared to a sample without holes. This paper presents a comparative analysis of APS- and SPS TBC systems sprayed on additively manufactured substrates without cooling Fig. 1. Additively manufactured Haynes 282 Ni-base alloy coupon samples with and without cooling holes (left) and SEM image of a cross section through a hole (right). M. Rüßmann et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 518 (2025) 132864 2

[PAGE 3] holes and with complex-shaped hole geometries. The objective was to investigate the propensity for blockage when changing the spraying angle for both TBC systems. Additionally, the question was whether SPS could be employed to achieve a lower degree of blockage than APS, and how they perform in furnace cycling tests. The impact of the cooling holes on the stresses was elucidated by analyzing SEM images of the cycled samples, and the failure mechanisms were attempted to be explained by numerical simulations. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Substrates Gamma prime- and precipitation-hardened Haynes 282 Ni-base al­ loys were utilized in the experiments. These were additively manufac­ tured via the Direct Metal Laser Melting (DMLM) process and had a coupon shape with a notch and a drilling hole for burner rig tests, illustrated in Fig. 1. The diameter was 30 mm, and the thickness was 3 mm. The nominal composition is shown in Table 1. Prior to the spraying of the bond coats, the substrates were grit blasted with F36 corundum Table 1 Nominal composition of a Haynes 282 alloy (Haynes International [53]). wt% Ni Cr Co Mo Ti Fe Al Mn Si C B Haynes 282 57 20 10 8.5 2.1 1.5 1.5 0.3 0.15 0.06 0.005 Table 2 Average roughness of the samples before and after grit-blasting of the Haynes 282 substrate (λc = 2,5 mm). Surface roughness As received Grit-blasted (F36-corundum) Ra (μm) 8 ± 2 6 ± 1 Rz (μm) 48 ± 13 37 ± 4 Fig. 2. SEM image with the ALM Haynes 282 substrate and the spraying direction that was employed for the HVOF spraying. Fig. 3. Schematic setup for a 70◦spraying angle with the Axial III torch. M. Rüßmann et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 518 (2025) 132864 3

[PAGE 4] material to optimize the micro roughness and the adhesion of the bond coats. During the process of grit-blasting, a concerted effort was made to avoid material being ejected into the inner hole area by means of the application of an angle. Subsequent to this process, the samples were subjected to cleaning in an ultrasonic bath. The surface roughness was determined by a stylus profilometer (MarSurf XR20, Mahr GmbH, G¨ottingen) and is listed in Table 2. It was hypothesized that the roughness would decrease due to the removal of roughness tips of the AM surface, but that the micro roughness would increase. 2.2. Bond coats For the bond coats a CoNiCrAlY powder Amdry 9954 (Oerlikon Metco, Wohlen, Switzerland) with a particle size range from 11 to 63 μm and a d50 of 30 μm was used. It was sprayed with a DJ2600 Gas fuel HVOF spray gun (Oerlikon Metco, Wohlen, Switzerland) with oxygen and hydrogen as combustion gases and with nitrogen as a shroud gas. To prevent the spraying of material into the cooling holes, a reduced spraying angle between the gun and substrate of 79◦was set by aligning the table with the sample holder at an angle of 11◦. The orientation of the cooling holes in relation to the torch is illustrated in Fig. 2. Following processing, a diffusion heat treatment was performed in two steps in a furnace with a vacuum atmosphere (1st step: 1120 ◦C for 2 h, 2nd step 788 ◦C for 8 h). 2.3. Plasma spraying deposition for the top coats 2.3.1. APS The TriplexPro 210 torch (Oerlikon Metco, Wohlen, Switzerland) was used to spray the standard APS YSZ top coats. For this, an argon‑helium plasma was employed. The selected feedstock material was a 7–8 wt% partially stabilized YSZ powder Metco 204NS (Oerlikon Metco, Wohlen, Switzerland), with a particle size distribution between 11 and 125 μm and a d50 of 56 μm. During spraying, a front side cooling with pressurized air at four bars was employed. 2.3.2. SPS The spray gun used for the SPS top coats was an Axial III™ gun from Mettech (Northwest Mettech Corp., North Vancouver, Canada). The YSZ-suspension utilized in this study was produced by Treibacher AG (Althofen, Austria). It had a solid load of 25 wt% and a d50 value of 500 nm. The material was fed into the spray gun using a NanoFeed 350 liquid delivery system (Northwest Mettech Corp., North Vancouver, Canada) and axially injected into a plasma gas flow, which comprised of argon, hydrogen and nitrogen. A back-side cooling of 2.5 bars was used during Table 3 Spraying parameters of the used spraying methods. Spray parameter HVOF APS SPS Process gases H2, O2, N2 Ar, He Ar, N2, H2 Gas flow rate (slpm) 630/460/165 46/4 225/30/45 Stand-off distance (mm) 200 200 70 Net power (kW) – 22 43 Powder feed rate (g/min) 40 29 13 Spraying angle 79 70/90 70/90 Cooling conditions – Front Back Table 4 Sample ID List. Sample ID Substrate TC Spraying angle Flat-APS-90 Flat APS 90 Holes-APS-90 Cooling holes APS 90 Flat-APS-70 Flat APS 70 Holes-APS-70 Cooling holes APS 70 Flat-SPS-90 Flat SPS 90 Holes-SPS-90 Cooling holes SPS 90 Flat-SPS-70 Flat SPS 70 Holes-SPS-70 Cooling holes SPS 70 Fig. 4. The average temperature during one typical thermal cycle was monitored by three thermocouples within the furnace. M. Rüßmann et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 518 (2025) 132864 4

[PAGE 5] spraying. Both top coats were produced with either 90◦- or a 70◦spraying angle, which was set by aligning the table to 20◦. This is depicted in Fig. 3. The spraying parameters are presented in Table 3. A total of eight distinct systems were produced, with three samples of each system. This is summarized in Table 4. 2.4. Furnace cycling tests The samples were subjected to a thermal cycling process in a furnace with a continuous flow of synthetic air (4 slpm N2, 1 slpm O2). The utilization of synthetic air ensured the maintenance of constant and therefore comparable atmospheric conditions. The samples were posi­ tioned on two sample holders and automatically transferred to a pre­ heated furnace. The samples were subjected to a temperature of 1100 ◦C for a period of 2 h. Subsequently, the samples were automatically removed from the furnace and cooled with a ventilator for a period of 15 min. This process was repeated until at least 30 % of the coating area exhibited visible spalling. Images of the samples were captured before and after the thermal cycling. The temperature was monitored by three thermocouples placed on each sample holder and one in the top part of the furnace. The mean temperature of the three thermocouples during a single thermal cycle is depicted in Fig. 4. 2.5. Metallographic preparation Cross sections were created of the samples for subsequent micro­ structural analysis. The samples were vacuum embedded using the two- part epoxy resin Epoxy 2000 (Cloeren Technology GmbH, Wegberg, Germany). Then the embedded samples were cut using an automatically fed cutting machine, the Discotom 100 (Struers GmbH, Ballerup, Denmark). Once cut, the specimens were mechanically ground and polished using standard metallographic polishing methods. To ensure that the cross-sections were positioned at the center point of the plane of the cooling holes, a manual hand-grinding step was conducted prior to the final polishing process. 2.6. SEM image analysis Following scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was done by using a Hitachi TM3000 tabletop scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, Tokio, Japan). Ten SEM images were captured at the same 150× magnification to assess the thickness of the coating across the entire surface. The lowest and highest thickness of the TC were then measured in each image using open-source image analysis software ImageJ. The arithmetic mean for each image was then calculated. The column den­ sity was determined from 150× magnification images by drawing a one- millimeter horizontal line in the center of the coating and then it was counted how many times the gaps intersect the horizontal line minus one. The porosity was determined from the average of ten thresholded images of 1000× magnification across the sample. For the SPS the fine and coarse porosity were summarized and also the porosity within the columns and between the columns. The average TGO thickness was obtained by using ten measurements per image at 1000× magnification. In total ten SEM images were analyzed per coating system. The degree of blockage was quantified by determining the blocked hole area (Eq. (1)) and calculating the blocking ratio (Eq. (2)), which relates the coated area to the uncoated area of the hole and is finally divided by the average coating thickness. Blocked hole area = Coating material (mm2) Hole area (mm2) (%) (1) Eq. 1 Blocking ratio (BR) = Blocked hole area Avg.coating thickness ( % μm ) (2) 2.7. Stress simulations with FEM To further investigate the stresses at the cooling holes, finite element calculations were performed with Ansys 2023 R2. The detailed thermal and mechanical properties were assigned to them from [53–57]. Typical properties for the lowest and highest temperature are summarized in Table 5. The following assumptions were made for the simulations. The ma­ terials have isotropic properties and are purely elastic. No sintering or creep was considered for the components and there were isothermal conditions with no heat conduction, convection or radiation. The tem­ perature of 1100 ◦C was defined as the stress-free state for the entire sample. In this study, only APS top coats were considered, as the formation of a columnar structure would require extensive modelling efforts for the SPS coatings. A cooling profile of the furnace cycling, recorded by thermocouples, was applied to the layer bodies, and the stresses were calculated by a static structural solver. To determine the stresses a two- dimensional axisymmetric model of the geometries was constructed (Fig. 5). This should also help to apply a finer mesh for the interfaces, where an additional 8-μm-thick TGO was placed between the bond coat and the top coat. The weak springs feature with a program-controlled spring stiffness has been used to avoid rigid body deformations. The influence of this feature on the stress has been considered to be negligible. The principal stresses were used to evaluate the stress concentrations in the ceramic. The principal stresses are the minimum and maximum values of normal stresses that occur on a surface where the shear stress is zero. The magnitude of these normal stresses together with the size and location of the cracks can increase the stress intensity near crack tips and drive the failure in the ceramic. The principal stresses could be directly obtained from the Ansys software. The maximum and minimal principal stress in 2D is defined as follows: Max principal stress : σ1 = (σx + σy 2 ) +̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ (σx −σy 2 )2 −τxy2 √ (3) Min principal stress : σ2 = (σx + σy 2 ) −̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ (σx −σy 2 )2 −τxy2 √ (4) The maximum principal stress σ1 indicates the maximum tensile stress or smallest compressive stress, while the minimum principal stress σ2 the smallest tensile stress and highest compressive stress in the investigated geometry. Table 5 Overview of the material properties of the different layers in the model, taken from [53–57]. Parameter Substrate Bond coat TGO APS-TC Thickness (μm) 3000 200 8 350 Young’s modulus (GPa) 20 ◦C 217 140 400 48 1100 ◦C 140 62 325 22 Poisson’s ratio 20 ◦C 0.32 0.32 0.23 0.10 1100 ◦C 0.36 0.33 0.25 0.12 CTE (K−1) 20 ◦C 1.2⋅10−5 1.4⋅10−5 4.6⋅10−6 9.0⋅10−6 1100 ◦C 1.7⋅10−5 1.8⋅10−5 8.3⋅10−6 1.1⋅10−5 M. Rüßmann et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 518 (2025) 132864 5

[PAGE 6] 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Influence of the spraying angle on the top coat microstructure The microstructure of the APS coating is lamellar and contains intra- and interlamellar cracks and pores, as illustrated in Fig. 6. The spraying angle of 70◦is accompanied by a variable stand-off distance of five millimeters between one edge of the sample and the other, related to the center. This change did not significantly affect the microstructure of the APS top coat, which can occur at reduced spraying angles [58,59]. The deformation behavior of the impinging melt droplets can be altered by the off-normal impact angle and changed momentum [58]. This results in particles elongating to one side and a reduction in deposition effi­ ciency due to increased rebounding effects [58]. 3.1.1. Microstructure of the APS top coats 3.1.2. Microstructure of the SPS top coats The microstructure of the SPS coatings exhibited columns that demonstrated slight changes in orientation relative to the torch, depending on their position on the substrate (Fig. 7). In contrast to the APS coatings the SPS coatings exhibited a more pronounced change in their size and porosity when the spraying angle was changed to 70◦. The columns located at the more distant end of the substrate exhibited a notable increase in size, accompanied by a corresponding decrease in orientation angle (~50◦). This is illustrated in Fig. 7. This phenomenon can be explained by the deflected plasma gas flow, in which particles are evenly deflected for the 90◦spraying angle, while preferentially deflected towards the lower part of the substrate for the 70◦spraying angle (see Fig. 7, Fig. 8 a) and b)). Unmolten or resolidified particles in the plasma gas jet thus deposited preferentially in that area. 3.2. Comparison of the properties between the APS and SPS coatings To achieve a comparable coating thickness to that of APS-90◦ sprayed coatings, it was necessary to increase the number of deposition cycles for a 70◦spraying angle by three. However, the coating thickness varied between 285 and 363 μm (see Table 6). For samples with holes, the thickness was lower compared to the flat samples, although more Fig. 5. a) 2D-model of the flat geometry (mesh: 394471 nodes, 130896 quadrilateral and triangular elements), b) 2D-model of a sample with one central cooling holes (mesh: 366225 nodes, 121386 quadrilateral and triangular elements). Fig. 6. Microstructure of the 90◦- (top row)- and 70◦- (bottom row) sprayed YSZ-APS TBC systems sprayed on different positions on the flat ALM substrates. Fig. 7. Microstructure of the 90◦- (top row)- and 70◦- (bottom row) sprayed YSZ-SPS TBC systems sprayed on different positions on the flat ALM substrates. M. Rüßmann et al. Surface & Coatings Technology 518 (2025) 132864 6