[PAGE 1] research papers 886 http://dx.doi.org/10.1107/S1600577515005433 J. Synchrotron Rad. (2015). 22, 886–894 Received 28 December 2014 Accepted 16 March 2015 Edited by P. A. Pianetta, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, USA Keywords: metrology; phase sensing; wavefront; speckle. X-ray pulse wavefront metrology using speckle tracking Sebastien Berujon,* Eric Ziegler and Peter Cloetens European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, BP-220, F-38043 Grenoble, France. *Correspondence e-mail: berujon@esrf.eu An instrument allowing the quantitative analysis of X-ray pulsed wavefronts is presented and its processing method explained. The system relies on the X-ray speckle tracking principle to accurately measure the phase gradient of the X-ray beam from which beam optical aberrations can be deduced. The key component of this instrument, a semi-transparent scintillator emitting visible light while transmitting X-rays, allows simultaneous recording of two speckle images at two different propagation distances from the X-ray source. The speckle tracking procedure for a reference-less metrology mode is described with a detailed account on the advanced processing schemes used. A method to characterize and compensate for the imaging detector distortion, whose principle is also based on speckle, is included. The presented instrument is expected to ﬁnd interest at synchrotrons and at the new X-ray free-electron laser sources under development worldwide where successful exploitation of beams relies on the availability of an accurate wavefront metrology. 1. Introduction At-wavelength metrology is gaining in importance at X-ray large-scale facilities in order to take full advantage of the beams delivered by high-brilliance sources (Berujon, 2013; Sawhney et al., 2013). While such metrology is highly desirable to optimize adaptive optics (Tyson, 2010), it ﬁnds also appli- cations for monitoring and limiting the thermal effects on optics in full operation. Within at-wavelength metrology, the X-ray beam wavefront itself is recorded to deduce the shape and defects of the optics (Born & Wolf, 2008; Wyant & Creath, 1992). Substantial resources were dedicated during the last decade to reach this goal. Nowadays, several instruments or methods are available for measuring the phase of an X-ray beam. However, since most of them require several acquisi- tions per wavefront reconstruction, their use becomes conﬁned to synchrotron sources for which the beam remains stable over a time period much longer than the total data acquisition time (Kewish et al., 2010; Brady & Fienup, 2006). These metrology methods can also be sometimes tedious to implement since they can require hundreds of images and low- noise detectors. The context with X-ray free-electron laser (X-FEL) sources is quite different as X-rays are emitted in the form of pulses, each X-ray bunch presenting a wavefront slightly different from the others. The need for a wavefront metrology capable of analyzing each individual bunch makes many online synchrotron metrology techniques inapplicable to X-FEL sources. The Hartman sensor is one of the few instruments capable of measuring beam wavefronts from shot to shot. This device has already been implemented at EUV FEL sources (Bache- lard et al., 2011) and hard X-ray synchrotrons (Mercere et al., ISSN 1600-5775

[PAGE 2] 2005) to evaluate the sphericity of wavefronts. Nevertheless, this instrument suffers from a couple of drawbacks: (i) a limited spatial resolution due to the minimum spacing and size of the grid probing holes, and (ii) the need for a delicate calibration to take into account and correct for the imper- fections of the grid. The grating interferometer is another device used for single-pulse metrology at X-FELs (Rutish- auser et al., 2012; Kayser et al., 2014; Fukui et al., 2013). While the Hartman instrument does not need coherence due to the hole grid, the shearing interferometer is conversely taking advantage of contrast brought by interference. This inter- ferometer, close in principle to the Hartman sensor, presents similar limitations, i.e. a trade-off must be made between spatial resolution and sensitivity while the grating quality may also affect the results. With both instruments the beam wavefront gradient is derived from a method based on the principle of wavefront modulation, the local propagation direction of the X-rays being inferred from the distortion of a reference pattern. This latter is generated either by the probing grid of holes in the case of the Hartmann or by the interferometer phase grating. Herein, we propose an original device based on the X-ray speckle tracking (XST) principle (Berujon et al., 2012; Morgan et al., 2012) to enable the recovery of an X-ray wavefront from two images acquired simultaneously. Previous work on XST (Berujon et al., 2012) showed the way the X-ray beam absolute wavefront could be obtained through the recording of images of a scattering object at different propagation distances from the source (see Fig. 1). Now, in addition to a scattering membrane, the wavefront sensor instrument integrates a semi- transparent scintillator, a key component able to emit visible light whilst being partially transparent to X-rays. In this manuscript, special care is given to the calibration and infor- mation that can be mathematically derived. For instance, it describes the way the detector distortion is taken into account and corrected for and the way the speckle tracking imple- mentation is enhanced. The instrument concept was experi- mentally demonstrated at synchrotrons. In principle, the transition to an X-FEL installation is quite straightforward providing technological issues related to the acquisition of simultaneous images can be solved. However, the instrument conﬁguration as presented in the following is limited to the sensing of the wavefront when no sample is inserted into the beam path. Modiﬁcations to the second detector of our current instrument would be necessary to obtain a conﬁg- uration where the beam wavefront is characterized before it is impinged by a sample. 2. Instrument presentation The XST principle is recalled in Fig. 1, where an X-ray beam passes through a thin phase object with random scattering grains and is then recorded at two different planes upon propagation. Due to the partial coherence of the X-ray beam, the waves scattered from the random phase object interfere with the transmitted light to generate speckle, i.e. random contrast features (Goodman, 2006). As the distortion of this interference pattern in the near ﬁeld region is solely depen- dent on the wavefront propagation (Cerbino et al., 2008; Gatti et al., 2008; Magatti et al., 2009), it is possible to deduce the wavefront state by numerical processing of the images (Berujon et al., 2012). The instrument presented in this paper employs two detectors collecting indirectly the visible light emitted through X-ray illumination of scintillators placed in series at two different propagation planes. Such a setup is comparable with the one used for instance by Carnibella et al. (2012). In it, the ﬁrst scintillator traversed by the photons presents the parti- cularity of being made of a thin low-absorbing material that lets most of the beam pass through it. The visible light generated by luminescence is then imaged on the CCD chip through a microscope objective and a carbon glass mirror orientated at 45 with respect to the probed beam direction and transparent to X-rays. The second camera is of a more traditional conception with a thick scintillator coupled to a microscope objective system to fully absorb the X-ray beam. The two cameras are triggered to acquire images of the beam simultaneously at the two different propagation planes. 3. Method principle 3.1. Image acquisition and preprocessing The XST method relies on the availability of high-spatial- resolution hard X-ray imaging detectors. With the current technology presented above, it is hence usual during experi- ments to deal with noise due to, among other causes, the electronics, scintillator defects or from stray light. Pre-processing operation can, however, strongly reduce their effects and optimize the signal-to-noise ratio of the imaging system. For instance, to compensate for some of the electronic noise, a darkﬁeld correction can be applied to minimize the background noise. For this, many images are acquired with the detector shutter closed, averaged to a matrix Idark and subtracted from the images recorded with the beam on. The non-homogeneous response of the scintillator can also be compensated through ﬂatﬁeld correction; an average image is generated from many acquisitions taken at various positions research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2015). 22, 886–894 Sebastien Berujon et al.  X-ray pulse wavefront metrology 887 Figure 1 Speckle tracking principle in the absolute conﬁguration.

[PAGE 3] of the membrane across the beam. This ﬂatﬁeld Iflat image is then used for the normalization of the image recorded intensity. Therefore, the recorded image Irec undergoes the correction Inorm ¼ Irec  Idark Iflat  Idark : ð1Þ While not mandatory, this type of correction, largely used among the X-ray imaging community, was proven to avoid obvious artefacts from the scintillator structure and from defective pixels. Fig. 2 shows an example of an image before and after the correction has been applied. 3.2. Speckle subset tracking The XST principle implemented in the ‘absolute mode’ conﬁguration (Berujon et al., 2012) corresponds to the sketch in Fig. 1: the two images of the scattering object contain high- frequency features which are essentially an almost similar speckle pattern. The speckle grains are used as markers, whose shapes upon propagation can be thought of as needles, to infer the trajectory of the rays from one image to the next. This concept is realised by the search and identiﬁcation of small subsets of pixels from the ﬁrst image into the second one using a cross-correlation algorithm. The localization of the correla- tion peak provides displacement vectors v between the images for the ðx0; y0Þ centered subsets. Noting the distance between the images d, the X-ray beam wavefront gradient is linked to v through the equation of propagation in a homogeneous media by (Berujon et al., 2012; Born & Wolf, 2008) rWðx0; y0Þ ¼ spix d v; ð2Þ where r is the del operator and spix is the detector effective pixel size. The numerical foundation of the XST technique relies on the ability to track the subsets between images accurately. The geometry and notations of the subset are displayed in Fig. 3. When considering a small subset of pixels initially centered around P0 = ðx0; y0Þ in the ﬁrst image, its transformation upon propagation to the second detector and now located around Pt = ðx0 0; y0 0Þ can be described by (Pan et al., 2009) x0 ¼ x þ ðx0; y0Þ; y0 ¼ y þ ðx0; y0Þ: ð3Þ In this set of equations, the  and  functions mirror both the displacement and distortion of the subset. For this subset noted f in the ﬁrst image, 0 and 0 are recovered by searching the subset matching similar counterpart g in the second image such that ð0; 0Þ ¼ arg max ð;Þ CNCð; Þ; ð4Þ where CNC is the zero-normalized cross-correlation criterion deﬁning the similarity between two considered subsets by CNCð; Þ ¼ P k fðxk; ykÞ  f   gðx0 k; y0 kÞ  g   P k fðxk; ykÞ  f  2P k gðx0 k; y0 kÞ  g  2  1=2 ; ð5Þ where f ¼ 1 N X k fðxk; ykÞ; g ¼ 1 N X k gðx0 k; y0 kÞ; ð6Þ and k 2 ½½1; N, N being the number of elements in the subset. The subset size is usually chosen in the range 13  13 pixels to 27  27 pixels which are sizes offering a good compromise between precision, resolution and speed of calculation. Instead of the zero-normalized cross-correlation criterion of equation (5), another equivalent criterion sometimes employed for subset tracking is the zero-normalized sum of squared difference (Pan et al., 2009; Yoshizawa, 2009; Zanette et al., 2014). 3.3. Rigid subset translation As described in equation (2), the recovery of the wavefront gradient is possible by simply calculating the pixel subset displacements between the images (Berujon et al., 2012). Such an approach considers only research papers 888 Sebastien Berujon et al.  X-ray pulse wavefront metrology J. Synchrotron Rad. (2015). 22, 886–894 Figure 2 Sample image from the ﬁrst detectors before (a) and after (b) normalization. Figure 3 Subset tracking geometry.

[PAGE 4] 0ðx0; y0Þ ¼ u; 0ðx0; y0Þ ¼ v; ð7Þ where u and v are scalars. Using a so-called peak ﬁnder algorithm, the localization of the maximum correlation between the subset and the target images provides the coor- dinates of the displacement vector vðx0; y0Þ = P0Pt = ðu; vÞ in the basis transverse to the beam. The precision of the tracking algorithms can be easily improved to reach a fraction of a pixel by ﬁtting the correlation peak neighbor pixels to a Gaussian or polynomial surface (Pan et al., 2009). 3.4. Subset distortion As pointed out in previous work (Berujon, 2013), the advantage of considering the subsets distortion is twofold: (i) it makes the tracking algorithm more robust and accurate, and (ii) it brings additional information on the local higher wavefront derivative orders. For instance, the local curvature is accessible through the calculation of the second-order subset distortion setting: 0ðx0; y0Þ ¼ u þ @u @x x þ @u @y y; 0ðx0; y0Þ ¼ v þ @v @x x þ @v @y y: ð8Þ In this set of equations, x = xk  x0 and y = yk  y0 are the distances from the subset center P0 to a point of the subset pk (see Fig. 3), and @u=@x, @u=@y, @v=@x and @v=@y are the ﬁrst- order distortion factors of the ðx0; y0Þ centered subset. These coefﬁcients can be calculated by Newton-based minimization of the functional CNCð; Þ ¼ CNC u; v; @u @x ; @u @y ; @v @x ; @v @y   : Such an optimization algorithm has a radius of convergence of the order of a pixel, implying the need for a ﬁrst calculation step to extract the pixel accurate rigid subset motion. To achieve a subpixel accuracy within this kind of algorithm, the second image is interpolated and the correlation coefﬁcient CNC calculated using an updated target subset deﬁned by  and  (Bruck et al., 1989; Vendroux & Knauss, 1998). The coefﬁcients @u=@x and @v=@y correspond to the magniﬁcation Mðx0; y0Þ = 1 þ d=R between the reference and the matching target subset. Optically, the local wavefront curvatures in the detector basis is hence x ¼ 1 Rx ¼ ð@u=@xÞ  1 d ; y ¼ 1 Ry ¼ ð@v=@yÞ  1 d : ð9Þ Similarly, it can be shown that the cross terms ð@u=@yÞ and ð@v=@xÞ are linked to the subset rigid body rotation ðx0;y0Þ by  ¼ 1 2 @u @y  @v @x   ; ð10Þ which is valid for small angles (Vendroux & Knauss, 1998). 4. Detector characterization and distortion correction As the optics used within the imaging detector to obtain a high resolving power is not aberration free, the recorded images become distorted. Fig. 4 shows, for instance, the strong contribution of the detector in the measurement of the wavefront error when the distortion is not corrected for. One common way of retrieving the optical distortion of an imaging system is to image a reference grid with well known characteristics and compare it with the expected pattern. Such a calibration is effective in imaging experiments since it concurrently corrects for the distortions induced by both the visible microscope objective and the X-ray beam aberration. Here, because the X-ray wavefront aberration is the object of investigation, we only aim at correcting the detector distor- tion. Unlike in methods usually employed for lens correction, we did not make any assumption on the distortion or use a distortion model for modal reconstruction (Brown, 1971), employing instead a zonal reconstruction. The proposed approach is based on a principle of rigid-body speckle trans- lation, similar in some aspects to the method described by Yoneyama et al. (2006), which consists of imaging a static speckle pattern whilst moving the detector transversally in the beam propagation direction. Let us write the real coordinates of an ideal distortion-free image point ðxr; yrÞ as a function of its distorted counterpart ðxd; ydÞ: xr ¼ xd þ fxðxd; ydÞ; yr ¼ yd þ fyðxd; ydÞ; ð11Þ where ð fx; fyÞ = f is a pair of functions describing the amounts of distortion in the detector basis ðex; eyÞ. Hence, when translating the detector by the amount hx = hex and tracking the speckle subsets between the images, the calculated displacement vectors are equal to research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2015). 22, 886–894 Sebastien Berujon et al.  X-ray pulse wavefront metrology 889 Figure 4 Wavefront error calculated without (a) and with (b) correction for the detector distortion.

[PAGE 5] vxy:ex ¼ 1 spix  h þ fxðxd þ h; ydÞ  fxðxd; ydÞ  ; vxy:ey ¼ 1 spix fyðxd þ h; ydÞ  fyðxd; ydÞ   ; ð12Þ and, equivalently, when applying a displacement hy = hey, v 0 xy:ex ¼ 1 spix  fxðxd þ h; ydÞ  fxðxd; ydÞ  ; v 0 xy:ey ¼ 1 spix h þ fyðxd; yd þ hÞ  fyðxd; ydÞ   : ð13Þ Since we can set the average of the function ð fx; fyÞ to 0 (no image translation), the effective detector pixel size spix can be taken as spix = h=hjvxyjiðx;yÞ where h. . .i denotes the mean operator. Moreover, from the equation sets (12) and (13), we can write the approximate directional derivatives of ð fx; fyÞ: rx fxðx; yÞ ¼ @fx @x  ðx;yÞ ¼ vxy:ex  hjvxyji hjvxyji ; rx fyðx; yÞ ¼ @fy @x  ðx;yÞ ¼ vxy:ex hjvxyji ; ry fxðx; yÞ ¼ @fx @y  ðx;yÞ ¼ v 0 xy:ex hjv 0xyji ; ry fyðx; yÞ ¼ @fy @y  ðx;yÞ ¼ v 0 xy:ey  hjv 0 xyji hjv 0xyji : ð14Þ The calculated functions for our ﬁrst detector are shown in Fig. 5. As mentioned previously, whilst some authors calcu- lated and used only two of these maps to recover the lens distortion parameters of a standard model (Yoneyama et al., 2006; Pan et al., 2013), we use instead all of the gradients maps to reconstruct the distortion functions. The next step is hence to numerically integrate the pairs of gradient maps ðrx fx; ry fxÞ and ðrx fy; ry fyÞ. This is done by matrix inversion to ﬁnd the intermediate function ð f 0 x; f 0 yÞ by least-square minimization of the functionals (Harker & O’Leary, 2008), J1 ¼ ZZ @f 0 x @x  rx fx  2 þ @f 0 x @y  ry fx  2 dx dy; J2 ¼ ZZ @f 0 y @x  rx fy  2 þ @f 0 y @y  ry fy  2 dx dy: ð15Þ Finally the integration constants are set so that h fxi = 0, h fyi = 0, i.e. fxðx; yÞ = f 0 xðx; yÞ  h f 0 xðx; yÞi and fyðx; yÞ = f 0 y ðx; yÞ  h f 0 yðx; yÞi. The functions ð fx; fyÞ, displayed in Fig. 6, were used to undistort the recorded image from the detector by bi-cubic interpolation. The approximate directional derivatives in equation (14) are obtained by forward difference. In practice, to increase the precision of the method, we used the central difference (Riley et al., 2006). Noting v1!2ðx; yÞ the displacement vector calcu- lated taking the reference subset in image 1 and target subset in image 2 and v2!1ðx; yÞ its reciprocal obtained searching the subset from image 2 into image 1, we derived the central vector value vxy = (1/2)[v1!2ðx; yÞ  v2!1ðx; yÞ]. The proposed method permits us to isolate the detector distortion and correct the images for it, thus leaving the X-ray beam aberration untouched. Correcting for the optical aber- rations of both the beam and the detector, as it can be of interest for imaging purposes, would require scanning the position of the scattering object rather than the detector position. 5. Experiment The experimental setup sketched in Fig. 7 was tested at the former ESRF beamline ID22-NI on the 6 GeV storage ring of the ESRF (Martinez-Criado et al., 2012). An undulator was tuned to produce a peak of photons at an energy of 29 keV. At a distance of 64 m from the source, a Kirkpatrick–Baez (KB) bender system focused the beam by the combination of a 180 mm focal length vertical focusing mirror and a 83 mm focal length horizontal focusing mirror (Barrett et al., 2011). research papers 890 Sebastien Berujon et al.  X-ray pulse wavefront metrology J. Synchrotron Rad. (2015). 22, 886–894 Figure 5 Directional derivative components of fx and fy: (a) rx fx, (b) ry fx, (c) rx fy and (d) ry fy. The scale is dimensionless as it corresponds to a variation of pixel size per pixel. Figure 6 Detector distortion in the (a) x and (b) y direction.

[PAGE 6] The combined energy resolution of the undulator harmonic with the multilayer coating on the KB mirrors provided a total energy selectivity of 1.5%. The aperture of the KB system was deﬁned by a pair of slits opened to 260 mm vertically and 160 mm horizontally. The size of the source was deﬁned in the vertical direction to 20 mm by the synchrotron source and in the horizontal direction 25 mm by a pair of slits generating a virtual source. With such a source and KB optics conﬁgura- tion, a focused beam of 50 nm  50 nm could be expected. A biological ﬁlter made of cellulose acetate with a nominal pore size of 0.45 mm was placed at 285 mm downstream of the mirror focus. Both detectors composing the system were CCD- based FReLoN cameras (Fast REad out LOw Noise), relying on indirect illumination of a scintillator through Olympus visible-light microscope optics. Their equivalent pixel sizes were s1 = 0.681 mm and s2 = 0.756 mm for the upstream and downstream detectors, respectively. The two scintillators were produced by liquid phase epitaxy; the ﬁrst one had a 26 mm- thick crystalline layer of LuAG:Ce as active material and the scintillator of the second detector used a 24 mm-thick layer of LSO:Tb. The ﬁrst scintillator had a theoretical absorption of about 23% and the second one of 30%. The higher absorption and then efﬁciency of the second scintillator was used to compensate for the beam divergence and then lower photon ﬂux at the second detector position. The ﬁrst detector was mounted on a stage ﬁxed along the ez axis at R1 ’ 885 mm from the focal plane of the KB optics and motorized to move within the ðex; eyÞ plane, while the second detector could be translated along the beam axis ez. Data recorded at two detector interdistances, d = 255 mm and d = 510 mm, allowed us to compare these two metrology data sets between them and to compare the single-pulse metrology with that employing only one detector. In the latter approach, the wavefront is derived from the analysis of two images recorded sequentially by the same (second) moving detector (Berujon et al., 2012). Dark images and ﬂat images were generated for both detectors from image stacks as explained and shown in x3.1. The alignment of the two detectors was made so that both of their ﬁelds of view intercept the central part of the expanding beam. However, a ﬁne adjustment is not necessary since an offset between the alignment axis of the two detectors would translate in the measurement of an additional optical tilt component. Such optical aberration is not a proper wavefront error and can be easily removed numerically. 5.1. Effect of the X-ray transparent mirror and scintillator The effect of the X-ray transparent mirror and ﬁrst detector scintillator on the X-ray beam was ﬁrst observed. Fig. 8 shows their combined effect on the images as recorded by the second detector after a normalization. As one can see, micro phase contrast features are observable over the full ﬁeld of view. Judging by their small size and relative low contrast, they are most likely due to inhomogeneities caused by the scintillator and the polishing of mirror substrates. Images acquired during a scan of the ﬁrst detector across the beam whilst the second one was kept static were used to estimate the phase effect of the transparent detector on the X-ray beam. Speckle tracking was performed between the images taken with the second detector. The displacement vectors calculated across the ﬁeld of view showed that the phase effect of the X-ray transparent mirror and scintillator is negligible on the low- and mid-spatial frequencies of the beam wavefront. Indeed, the displacement vector ﬁeld was shown to be ðvÞ > 0.03 pixel over the full ﬁeld of view, corresponding to the noise level expected for the method (Berujon et al., 2012). This corroborates the conclusion that optical windows and transmission homogeneous objects generate very little phase shift as compared with reﬂective optics, although tending to affect the beam coherence through bulk scattering as observed in Fig. 8 (Berujon, 2013). 5.2. Wavefront sensing and reconstruction After detector calibration, pairs of images were acquired simultaneously with the two detectors. Images from each detector were then applied appropriate normalization and distortion correction. Square subsets of size 21  21 pixels and research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2015). 22, 886–894 Sebastien Berujon et al.  X-ray pulse wavefront metrology 891 Figure 8 Effect of the semi-transparent mirror and ﬁrst detector scintillator on the X-ray beam as seen by the second detector. Figure 7 Setup of the experiment. The key element of the system, represented in light blue, is a carbon glass mirror reﬂecting the visible light emitted by the scintillator and letting the X-rays pass through. The distances z = 285 mm and R1 = 885 mm were ﬁxed, whereas the distance d was ﬁrst set to d = 255 mm and later to d = 510 mm.