[PAGE 1] Analysis of the impact of misalignments bi-concave diamond lens on wavefront Lian Xue a , Haipeng Zhang a, Yabing Wang b, Weiwei Zhang b,**, Zhongliang Li a,* a Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201800, China b Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China A B S T R A C T With the rapid development of the 4th generation high-energy synchrotron sources and X-ray free-electron laser facilities, wavefront preservation is put forward as a new challenge in compound refractive lenses (CRL) for beam transport. More sophisticated measurements are required for characterizing the performance of CRL. In this study, different methods are used to measure the misalignment and surface errors of bi-concave lens including confocal laser microscopy, X-ray speckle vector tracking, and computer tomography. The effects of the misalignment and surface errors on focus profile were also simulated based on physical optics. 1. Introduction Since mid-1990s, X-ray lenses have been developed and used as beam conditioning and final focusing element of the X-rays at many high-energy synchrotron sources [1]. Unfortunately, any defect in the X-ray lenses, either from polishing or contamination, will amplify the beam’s coherent degradation. Therefore, the rapid development of the high coherence X-ray source such as the fourth-generation synchrotron sources and the X-ray free-electron lasers (XFEL) facilities put forward a new challenge for X-ray optics: wavefront preservation. An ideal wavefront plays a key role in the success of advanced experiments especially for applications based on coherence, such as X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy, coherent diffraction imaging, propagation-based phase-contrast imaging, and ptychography. On the contrary, a non-ideal wavefront is also a potential bottleneck preventing the exploitation of the full characteristics of the source. Although Be X-ray lenses were invented and applied earlier in synchrotron, signifi­ cant effort has been put into the fabrication of diamond X-ray lenses due to the excellent performance of diamond materials used for X-ray optics [2–4]. High-quality bi-concave 2D focusing diamond X-ray lenses of apex-radius R = 100 μm have been obtained to replace the traditional cylindrical lenses in the hard X-ray in ESRF [5]. However, due to limi­ tations in current manufacturing capabilities, not all roadblocks have been removed to obtain an ideal diamond lens in a perfect photon transport system. As a result, advanced diagnostic method is required to properly exploit all the new potentiality of the lenses. All in all, the X-ray lenses must be fabricated to satisfy the shape of the lens following very closely to ideal mathematical surfaces (e.g. paraboloids) meanwhile keeping an extremely accurate surface finish. In recent years, both experimental and theoretical studies have been conducted to understand the X-ray lens [6,7]. In terms of experimental measurement, two major measurement methods are prevalent for characterizing X-ray lenses. The first method is an ex-situ measurement based on confocal laser microscopy. Such a visible-light metrology has been used as for quickly obtaining information on the geometric aper­ ture since it can be completed in a conventional optical testing labora­ tory. The second method is X-ray speckle tracking [8,9], which is performed as an at-wavelength measurement for wavefront. Although more realistically performance of the X-ray lens can be demonstrated by using the method, the measurement has to be carried out on synchrotron facility. The conventional visible-light based measurement focuses only on surface errors but without an established standard for the unalign­ ment of a bi-concave lens. But, for a high-performance transport system, the wavefront will be affected directly by the misalignment of bi-concave lenses and even worse for applying dozens of lenses. Unfor­ tunately, the wavefront error caused by the misalignment could not be compensated anymore. In this work, a framework for simulating X-ray lenses is proposed, taking into account their unalignment, absorption, and individual lens phase errors. Different methods are used to measure the misalignment and phase errors of bi-concave lenses including confocal laser micro­ scopy, X-ray speckle tracking, and computer tomography. The impact of an unaligned bi-concave diamond lens on the wavefront is presented by conducting theoretical simulation and experimental investigation. * Corresponding author. ** Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: zhangww@ihep.ac.cn (W. Zhang), lizhongliang@sari.ac.cn (Z. Li). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nima https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2025.170282 Received 4 September 2024; Received in revised form 9 January 2025; Accepted 30 January 2025 Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A 1073 (2025) 170282 Available online 30 January 2025 0168-9002/© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V.

[PAGE 2] 2. Theory and model 2.1. Ideal thin lens Many different surface shapes were attempted for X-ray lenses in initial experiments but soon replaced by a parabolic shape because parabolic shape presents an excellent approximation to geometric focusing and reduce the geometrical aberrations to smaller levels than the contributions from the fabrication errors and diffraction effects [10]. The X-ray lens can be defined by a set of parameters including: (a) material; (b) apex radius of curvature (R); (c) thickness of the lens (L); (d) geometrical aperture (A); (e) distance between the apices of the parabolas (d); (f) misalignments of the parabolas (Δx, Δy). The focus length f of a single refracting surface of radius R is defined as: f = R δ (1) Where the index of refraction for the X-ray regime can be expressed as a complex number: n = 1 − δ + iβ, with δ being the refraction index decrement and β the absorption index. Only the real part of the indices of refraction will be considered here because the focusing effect of the lenses is dominated by the real part. Generally, a single lens cannot provide sufficient focusing ability because of the weak refraction of a single element. So, several lenses are stacked to focus the X-ray beam. Under the assumption and correction of thin elements [6], the corrected focal length for a thick lens can be described by fl = R 2Nδ + Ll 6 (2) Where Ll is the longitudinal size of the lens and N is the number of the lens. That is the distance from the front surface of the first optical element to the back surface of the last lens. 2.2. Aberrations The Strehl ratio is defined as the ratio of the far-field peak intensity on the actual beam axis to the peak intensity on the ideal beam axis with the same power and phase uniformity. It is an indicator of the quality of the distribution of intensity in an optical system [11]. Therefore, in the optical system, a minimum acceptable value can defined as the Strehl ratio (Sr) when evaluating the final application and the desired perfor­ mance. However, Sr ≥0.8 is a common evaluation criteria as the stan­ dard deviation of the projected figure error σz must be less than λ/ 14δ in this case [6]. 2.3. The model of the CRL The model for a CRL follows wave-optics representation [12]. By dropping the explicit energy dependency of the index of refraction and the z-dependence of δ and β, the amplitude transmission of radiation through matter can be expressed as T(Δz) =̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ exp (−μΔz) √ ⋅exp (iϕ), (3) ϕ = −2π λ δΔz, (4) Where, Δz is the projected thickness. μ is the linear attenuation coeffi­ cient. Equation (3) shows the absorption and phase-shift experienced by the wavefront when passing through matter. The transmitted electric field can be obtained by multiplication of the input field with the complex transmission operator in equation (3). The projected thickness Δz at any point inside the geometric aperture of a single biconcave paraboloidal X-ray lens can be described by Δz = x2 + y2 2R + x2 + y2 2R + d = x2 + y2 R + d, (5) For a single bi-concave lens, the transverse offset of the parabolic in one face is t=̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ t2 x + t2 y √ , where tx is the deviation of the x-axis, and ty is the deviation of the y-axis. The combination of the shapes of these two surfaces still results in a parabolic form, which has the same radius of curvature as the lens that has no transverse offset in two faces. It has a translation and a constant absorption term. When the transverse offset coordinate of one face is (tx,ty), the distribution of the lens thickness is Δz = x2 + y2 2R + (x −tx)2 + ( y −ty )2 2R + d = ( x − tx 2 )2 + ( y − ty 2 )2 R + t2 4R + d (6) Where, t2 4R is the additional constant absorption term. 3. Lens fabrication Ultrafast (femtosecond) laser ablation of materials has had signifi­ cant development in recent years due to its promise of high machining accuracy and exceptional quality of material processing. It provided a new opportunity for micromachining materials like diamond. In this paper, we mainly display a bi-concave lens produced by the femto­ second laser micro-machining. The lens is fabricated of single-crystal diamond plates with a diameter of 2 mm and thickness of 1 mm, which is commercially available. These diamond plates are grown by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. To machine a two- dimensional paraboloid shape, we utilize an ultra-violet 343 nm wave­ length laser with an 800 fs pulse duration to ablate circle patterns Fig. 1. Laser scanning confocal microscopy of a diamond CRL 055B (a) 3D profile of front refractive surface; Residual surface error of front surface(b) and back surface(c) after extraction of a paraboloid fit. L. Xue et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1073 (2025) 170282 2

[PAGE 3] gradually reducing the circle diameter with depth. The laser beam was focused to a 3 μm spot size and steered by a precision galvo-mirror. The removal rate was about 0.25 μm per layer. After one side is completed, the plate is turned over to identically machine the opposite side. Both two sides are unpolished R = 200 μm diamond lenses with a physical aperture of about 880 μm. The motion errors, triggering jitter and re- deposition of the ablated material will result in figure errors during the manufacturing process. This will result in a deviation between the obtained contour and the designed geometric shape. The lack of in-situ metrology makes it virtually impossible to iteratively eliminate corre­ lated errors by adjusting the ablation recipe. 3.1. Visible-light metrology Despite not being implemented as an in-situ measurement, confocal laser microscopy (CLM) has been implemented as an ex-situ measure­ ment to quickly provide information on the geometric aperture. As shown in Fig. 1a, this preliminary inspection tool provided refracting surface depth, parabolic shape and radius of curvature of individual refracting surfaces. By removing the best parabolic fit from the metro­ logical data, we can determine the residual error of the surface as shown in Fig. 1b and c. It indicates that a few micrometers r.m.s surface error has been achieved. This technique has a high spatial resolution, but the mutual alignment of the measurements from the front and back surfaces in a bi-concave lens cannot be achieved. Also, using visible-light confocal laser microscopy is very difficult to measure polished lenses with very smooth surfaces. Because little signal returns from the steeper parts of the parabolic surfaces. 4. At-wavelength metrology for CRLs Although helpful in using CLM to measure the depth and aperture of the CRLs, it only probes one side of a bi-concave CRL at a time. To overcome those drawbacks, we use at-wavelength metrology tech­ niques: X-ray (nearfield) speckle vector tracking (XSVT) [13] and computer tomography (CT) [14] to recover figure errors. 4.1. via XSVT When a random static scatterer illuminated by a lateral coherence monochromatic beam, the speckle pattern will be generated and be imaged onto a 2D detector. By transversely shifting the random scatterer across the beam, a stack of reference datasets is taken. A CRL is then put into the beam downstream of the scatterer, and a second dataset is taken by shifting the scatterer once again. By comparing both datasets, the displacement of the spackle pattern at the detector position is calculated. The deflection angle, calculated by α = λ 2π∇ϕ, is related to the beam phase gradient ∇ϕ. Where λ is the wavelength. The beam phase can be obtained by numerical integration of the phase gradients. This mode is called the differential XSVT. The XSVT technique is described in more detail in reference [13] by Berujon et al. Then the CRL thickness is calculated as Δz = − λϕ 2πδ, where δ is the energy-dependent refractive index decrement of the lens material. Then the residual error profile can be evaluated by subtracting the best-fit paraboloid from Δz. While the best-fit parabola radius determines the focal length, the residual thick­ ness error dominates the focal spot shape and wavefront distortion. Our XSVT experiments were performed at the SSRF beamline BL09B [15] using a monochromatic beam at 15 KeV. The scatterer (an abrasive paper with an average pore size of 5 μm and thickness of about 150 μm) was mounted on piezoelectric nano-positioners to ensure high position repeatability between both datasets. The distance between CRL and the detector was kept at 750 mm. The detector was a Hamamatsu qCMOS sensor coupled to a 10X microscope objective imaging a 100 μm-thick LuAG scintillator. The effective pixel size is 0.46 μm. 81 reference im­ ages and 81 sample images are obtained after scanning. The XSVT results of CRL are shown in Fig. 2. The fitting vertex curvature is 393.12 μm. The XSVT measurement cann’t distinguish the curvatures of the front and the back side. Here, we take half of the curvature value (196.56 μm) to compare with other methods. In this mode, the results show the projected thickness of the CRL. The surface errors in the pro­ jection approximation are recovered by removing a paraboloid of rev­ olution (2D focusing). The presence of concentric circle-like- structures in both lens graphs is evident. These rotational symmetric features come from the manufacturing process. As shown in Fig. 2. This method cannot distinguish between the front and back surfaces in a bi-concave lens. Therefore, when adjusting the CRL attitude, there will be a tilt angle. A simple method can measure this misalignment. As shown in Fig. 3, placing the CRL flat can indicate the asymmetry of the upper and lower surfaces. However, the diamond CRL gives stronger edge contrast in phase-contrast imaging - this is man­ ifested as the dark curve in the graphs from Fig. 3. It reduces the accu­ racy of extracting curves to calculate curvature. 4.2. via CT CT is a good method for measuring the misalignment of the front and back surfaces in a bi-concave lens. The 3D morphology feature of our CRL was obtained by synchrotron X-ray tomography performed at SSRF BL09B. The X-ray energy was 25 keV and the distance between the specimen and camera was 20 cm. After scanning, a total of 1440 pro­ jections of images were collected. The raw 32-bit images were then converted to 8-bit using commercial software named ADUrecon®. The voxel size of ROI was set to 1.65 μm. Another commercial software named Avizo® was employed to perform the 3D reconstruction and rendering of the images. Fig. 4 shows the 3D morphology feature of the CRL 055B. An obvious misalignment of the bi-concave can be observed in Fig. 4a. The offset is 6 μm in one direction and 66 μm in the orthogonal direction. Removing the best paraboloid fit from the metrology data, we can determine the figure errors as displayed in Fig. 4c and d. 4.3. Figure errors of three methods Using different measurement methods for the same lens helps to comprehensively understand the performance of the lens. CLM could study the surface roughness and measure the depth and aperture of the machined lens, and it is the initial inspection. XSVT is an at-wavelength metrology technique that could provide a wavefront of a single CRL or a stack of CRLs. CT measures the asymmetry of the front and back surfaces and gives the 3D morphology feature, but requires thousands of images. By overlaying the measurement data from both sides, the overall data of CLM and CT can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 5, the presence of concentric circle-like- structures is evident in all three results. The figure error r.m.s. value (σ) over the useful aperture is not much different. Note that, although the r.m.s. value of the figure errors is not significantly Fig. 2. Single-lens radiograph (a) and figure error (b) for an investigated lens: CRL 055B, R = 196.56 μm. L. Xue et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1073 (2025) 170282 3

[PAGE 4] altered between CLM and CT, the spatial distribution is. The probable reasons for this difference are two: (i) a mismatch between the two sides in the CLM method; and (ii) Rotation of CRL in CT experiments. A mean radius of curvature of R is R = 193.36 μm (CLM), R = 196.56 μm (XSVT), and R = 193.83 μm (CT). The XSVT has slightly increased the radius of curvature R. The target radii are R = 200 μm. 5. Simulations of the 2D profile To understand the X-ray lenses’ impact on the optical design of a beamline, it is necessary to be able to simulate them realistically. The effect of the lens surface errors and misalignment can be evaluated via simulations, as we have measured these profiles for both sides. Based on the measurement results, the vertex thickness of the lens is typically Fig. 3. Side radiograph for the investigated lens: CRL 055B (a) 0◦and (b) Rotate 90◦in the horizontal plane. Fig. 4. (a) The 3D morphology feature of CRL 055B. (b) The misalignment of the front and back surfaces in the bi-concave lens. (c) and (d) the figure error and the fitting vertex curvature for each side of CRL. Fig. 5. The total figure errors of CRL 055B using different measurement methods: (a) the result of the CLM method; (b) the result of the XSVT method; and (c) the result of the CT method. L. Xue et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1073 (2025) 170282 4

[PAGE 5] ~50 μm, and the effective lens geometric aperture is ~800 μm. The energy used for simulation is 15 keV. The index of refraction for dia­ mond is n = 1 − 3.243 × 10−6 + i ⋅1.866 × 10−9. The focal length of a single lens is 30.836 m. This paper mainly focuses on exploring the impact of wavefront under the condition of real surface shape error and misalignment between the upper and lower sides of CRL. All simulations presented here were made using Synchrotron Radi­ ation Workshop (SRW) [16] by a collimated (plane) wavefront as any deviations from a constant phase and intensity on the exit of the optical system can be immediately attributed to the CRL model being studied. The thickness error profile can be treated in SRW as a “transmission” element, where the key parameters are the transmission amplitude and the optical path difference − δΔz. Each error profile used in the following simulations comes from the real 2D diamond lens individually characterized using CLM, XSVT, or CT. The misalignment of the front and back surfaces in a bi-concave lens is also incorporated into the simulations when using CT data. The simulations describe well the beam wavefront around the focal spot. To demonstrate the influence of surface shape and misalignment more clearly, 10 pieces of CRLs are used in a stack. The simulation is composed of lenses with random rotation angle and without any spacing. The introduction of figure errors to the simulations shows a clear degradation of the uniformity of beam spots, which is more evident in the XSVT and CT result (Fig. 6c and d). For reference, the ideal wavefront is presented in Fig. 6a. Applying the Sr criterion calculated for diamond lenses illuminated at 15 keV requires the accumulated pro­ jected figure errors to be σ ≤1.82 μm. Fig. 6 shows that, the system is operating far from ideal as the system exceeds the limit imposed by the Sr criterion. The addition of the horizontal and vertical shift is related to scattering around the focused beam, contributing thus to an increased background and consequently reducing the peak intensity (Fig. 6d). 6. Conclusions In this study, single-crystalline bi-concave 2D focusing diamond lenses have been measured by CLM, XSVT, and CT methods. Building on physical optics concepts and already implemented optical elements in SRW, the characteristics of CRL were studied using real imperfections obtained with measurement results. The effects of figure errors on beam shape and intensity were simulated accurately. The simulation results can have immediate application to lens tolerancing and guidelines for lens production and testing. CRediT authorship contribution statement Lian Xue: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Data curation. Haipeng Zhang: Data curation. Yabing Wang: Writing – review & editing, Data curation. Weiwei Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization. Zhongliang Li: Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Methodology, Conceptualization. Funding information This work was supported by the State Key R&D Program of China (2021YFA1600703). Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Data availability Data will be made available on request. References [1] A. Snigirev, V. Kohn, I. Snigireva, I. Lengeler, Nature 384 (1996) 6604. [2] A. Snigirev, V. Yunkin, I. Snigireva, M. Di Michiel, M. Drakopoulos, S. Kouznetsov, L. Shabel’nikov, M. Grigoriev, V. Ralchenko, I. Sychov, M. Hoffmann, E.I. Voges, Proc. SPIE 4783 (2002) 1–9. [3] M. Polikarpov, V. Polikarpov, I. Snigireva, A. Snigirev, Phys. Procedia 84 (2016) 213–220. [4] S. Terentyev, M. Polikarpov, I. Snigireva, M. Di Michiel, S. Zholudev, V. Yunkin, S. Kuznetsov, V. Blank, A. Snigirev, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 24 (2017) 103–109. [5] R. Celestre, S. Antipov, E. Gomez, T. Zinn, R. Barretta, T. Rotha, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 29 (2022) 629–643. [6] R. Celestre, S. Berujon, T. Roth, M. Sanchez Del Rio, R.J. Barrett, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 27 (2020) 305–318. [7] D. Paganin, Coherent X-Ray Optics, first ed., Oxford University Press, 2006. [8] H. Wang, Y. Kashyap, K. Sawhney, Opt. Express 23 (2015) 23310. [9] Z. Qiao, X. Shi, M.J. Wojcik, L. Rebuffi, L. Assoufid, Appl. Phys. Lett. 119 (2021) 011105. [10] B. Lengeler, C. Schroer, B. Benner, T. Günzler, M. Kuhlmann, J. Tümmler, A. Simionovici, M. Drakopoulos, A. Snigirev, I. Snigireva, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. 467–468 (2001) 944–950. [11] M. Born, E. Wolf, A.B. Bhatia, P.C. Clemmow, D. Gabor, A.R. Stokes, A.M. Taylor, P.A. Wayman, W.L. Wilcock, Principles of Optics: Electromagnetic Theory of Propagation, Interference and Diffraction ofLight, seventh ed., Cambridge University Press, 1999. [12] J.W. Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics, fourth ed., W. H. Freeman and Company, 2017. [13] B. Berujon, E. Ziegler, Phys. Rev. A 92 (2015) 013837. [14] J. Ji, H. Guo, Y. Xue, R. Chen, Y. Fu, G. Du, B. Deng, H. Xie, T. Xiao, Nucl. Sci. Tech. 34 (2023) 197. [15] Z. Li, Y. Fan, L. Xue, Z. Zhang, J. Wang, Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Synchrotron Radiation Instrumentation – SRI2018, AIP Conf. Proc. 2054 (2019) 060040. [16] O. Chubar, P. Elleaume, Proceedings of the 6th European Particle Accelerator Conference, EPAC’98), Stockholm, Sweden, 1998, pp. 1177–1179. Fig. 6. Simulated X-ray beam profile at the focus plane in stack case (10 pieces of CRLs). (a) Simulated with ideal CRLs; (b) Simulated with figure errors from CLM (without misalignment); (c) Simulated with figure errors from XSVT; (d) Simulated with figure errors from CT (with misalignment). L. Xue et al. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 1073 (2025) 170282 5