[PAGE 1] research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2019). 26, 1115–1126 https://doi.org/10.1107/S1600577519005721 1115 Received 14 January 2019 Accepted 26 April 2019 Edited by E. Plo¨njes, DESY, Germany 1This article will form part of a virtual special issue containing papers presented at the PhotonDiag2018 workshop. Keywords: X-ray free-electron lasers; wavefront sensing; grating interferometry; speckle tracking. Supporting information: this article has supporting information at journals.iucr.org/s Wavefront sensing at X-ray free-electron lasers1 Matthew Seaberg,a* Ruxandra Cojocaru,b Sebastien Berujon,b Eric Ziegler,b Andreas Jaggi,c Juraj Krempasky,c Frank Seiboth,d Andrew Aquila,a Yanwei Liu,e Anne Sakdinawat,e Hae Ja Lee,a Uwe Flechsig,c Luc Patthey,c Frieder Koch,c Gediminas Seniutinas,c Christian David,c Diling Zhu,a Ladislav Mikesˇ,f Mikako Makita,f Takahisa Koyama,g,h Adrian P. Mancuso,f,i Henry N. Chapmanj,k,l and Patrik Vagovicˇf,j,m* aLinac Coherent Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA, bEuropean Synchrotron Radiation Facility, CS 40220, F-38043 Grenoble Cedex 9, France, cPaul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland, dDeutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestraße 85, D-22607 Hamburg, Germany, eStanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA, fEuropean XFEL GmbH, Holzkoppel 4, 22869 Schenefeld, Germany, gRIKEN SPring-8 Center, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan, hJapan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute (JASRI), 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5198, Japan, iDepartment of Chemistry and Physics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia, jCenter for Free-Electron Laser Science, DESY, Notkestraße 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany, kCentre for Ultrafast Imaging, University of Hamburg, Luruper Chaussee 149, 22607 Hamburg, Germany, lDepartment of Physics, University of Hamburg, Luruper Chaussee 149, 22607 Hamburg, Germany, and mInstitute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic v.v.i., Na Slovance 2, 182 21, Praha 8, Czech Republic. *Correspondence e-mail: seaberg@slac.stanford.edu, patrik.vagovic@desy.de Here a direct comparison is made between various X-ray wavefront sensing methods with application to optics alignment and focus characterization at X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs). Focus optimization at XFEL beamlines presents unique challenges due to high peak powers as well as beam pointing instability, meaning that techniques capable of single-shot measurement and that probe the wavefront at an out-of-focus location are desirable. The techniques chosen for the comparison include single-phase-grating Talbot interferometry (shearing interferometry), dual-grating Talbot interferometry (moire´ deﬂectometry) and speckle tracking. All three methods were implemented during a single beam time at the Linac Coherent Light Source, at the X-ray Pump Probe beamline, in order to make a direct comparison. Each method was used to characterize the wavefront resulting from a stack of beryllium compound refractive lenses followed by a corrective phase plate. In addition, difference wavefront measurements with and without the phase plate agreed with its design to within /20, which enabled a direct quantitative comparison between methods. Finally, a path toward automated alignment at XFEL beamlines using a wavefront sensor to close the loop is presented. 1. Introduction As more X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs) come online around the world and the scientiﬁc demands of these light sources becomes ever greater, there is an increasing need for the further development of a broad suite of diagnostics (Tschentscher et al., 2006; Ackermann et al., 2007; Allaria et al., 2010; Yabashi et al., 2015; Bostedt et al., 2016; Milne et al., 2017; Ko et al., 2017). Experiments are typically performed at XFELs for one of two following reasons: to take advantage of the high time resolution they afford in contrast to that avail- able from third-generation synchrotrons and in cases when high X-ray peak intensities are needed (Bostedt et al., 2016). In the latter case, focus optimization and characterization are especially important. For instance, in order to understand data in nonlinear optics experiments an accurate knowledge of the X-ray focus proﬁle is critical (Fuchs et al., 2015). In addition, ISSN 1600-5775

[PAGE 2] experiments performed with the goal of single-particle imaging beneﬁt from good focusing in order to achieve higher total scattering efﬁciencies (Aquila et al., 2015). These experiments drive the need for devices that are sensitive to the X-ray wavefront both for optics align- ment and for focus characterization. Focus characterization is especially challenging at XFELs, for which methods that involve placing a probe close to the focus are either subject to damage (i.e. knife-edge, ptychography) or time-consuming (imprints) (Sikorski et al., 2015). Further, techniques that are capable of measuring in a single shot are critical to account for and characterize the role that spatial jitter can play at these light sources. In this work we describe three related deterministic techniques currently in use at XFELs, all of which make use of information based on near-ﬁeld diffraction to directly measure the gradient of the X-ray wavefront: single-grating Talbot interferometry, moire´ deﬂectometry and speckle tracking. In Section 3 we describe the requirements and methods behind each technique. In Section 4 we discuss the progress that has been made towards automated alignment of an XFEL beamline and what remains to be done. Finally, in Section 5 we present the results of a direct comparison between the three techniques at the X-ray Pump Probe (XPP) beamline of the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS). 2. Experimental setup We used the monochromatic beam delivered by the dual crystal diamond monochromator at XPP as the platform for our comparison, centered at a photon energy of 9.5 keV (Zhu et al., 2014). In this comparison we made use of beryllium compound refractive lenses (CRLs) to focus the beam and measured the effects of a phase plate designed to compensate for the lens aberrations using the various techniques (Seiboth et al., 2017). The CRL stack consists of 20 lenses with 50 mm radius of curvature and 300 mm diameter, resulting in a 340 mm focal length and 110 nm full width at half-maximum (FWHM) at focus in the absence of aberrations. The correc- tive phase plate was fabricated using 3D microprinting in nanoscribe IP-S photoresist and its design is based on a model of the characteristic shape error of the lenses described above, without accounting for any imperfections of this particular lens stack. A custom setup designed to accommodate the three avail- able techniques was designed and implemented as shown in Fig. 1. The CRL stack is motorized with ﬁve degrees of freedom allowing it to be aligned onto the X-ray beam’s optical axis and the phase plate is motorized with horizontal and vertical degrees of freedom [Fig. 1(a)]. The single-grating interferometry and speckle tracking techniques share a mounting platform for the gratings and speckle membranes, with a kinematic mount providing the ability to swap between gratings and membranes in a reproducible manner [Fig. 1(b)]. Two scintillator-based indirect X-ray detectors (Optique Peter microscopes) are placed further downstream at a ﬁxed distance from the focus, but with motorized travel in the horizontal and vertical directions [Fig. 1(c)]. The detector labeled as Detector 1 is partially transparent and was only used for the speckle tracking measurements. Detector 2 was used for both single-grating interferometry and speckle tracking measurements. Finally, the moire´ interferometer, which is self-contained, is located just downstream of Detector 2 [Fig. 1(d)]. 3. Wavefront sensing techniques The past couple of decades have seen major advances in X-ray wavefront sensing (Naulleau et al., 2000; David et al., 2002; Rutishauser et al., 2011, 2012; Matsuyama et al., 2012; Kayser et al., 2014, 2016; Berujon et al., 2015; Assouﬁd et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018), that have also beneﬁted from the long history of wavefront sensing methods in the visible region of the spec- research papers 1116 Matthew Seaberg et al.  Wavefront sensing at XFELs J. Synchrotron Rad. (2019). 26, 1115–1126 Figure 1 Photographs of the experimental setup. The X-ray beam was focused by a set of beryllium CRL lenses (a) and a phase plate with horizontal and vertical degrees of freedom was placed downstream of the CRL optics. The grating/speckle phase modulators were mounted on a motorized positioner with long travel range along the optical axis (b). Two indirect X-ray detectors (c) with YAG scintillating screens were placed further downstream at approximately 2 m distance from the focus, and the compact moire´ interferometer was mounted as the last part of the setup (d).

[PAGE 3] trum. All three techniques discussed here make use of near- ﬁeld diffraction for direct measurement of the wavefront gradient. As will be seen in the following, each technique has various advantages and disadvantages, but in the end all give similar, accurate results. 3.1. Single-phase-grating Talbot interferometry When the periodic modulator, amplitude or phase grating, is illuminated with a partially or fully coherent X-ray wave- ﬁeld, the so-called self-images can be measured downstream of the modulator. We refer to these measurements as inter- ferograms. The interferograms are measured at discrete distances. In the case of an absorption grating, strong modu- lations occur at Talbot distances, but in the case of a phase grating strong modulations occur at intermediate distances called fractional distances. The contrast of the interferograms is maximized at the planes perpendicular to the optical axis (Suleski, 1997) given by distances zF ¼ 1  2 n 2 d 2 1  ¼ p d 2 1  ; n ¼ 1; 3; 5; . . . ; ð1Þ where  = 1 in the case of a /2 phase grating and  = 2 in the case of a  phase shifting grating; p is a generalized parameter that we refer to as the Talbot order, d1 is the period of the grating, and  is the X-ray wavelength. If the conical illumi- nation (divergent beam generated for example by focusing optics) is applied, the fractional distance zF will be scaled by the geometrical magniﬁcation M (Fresnel scaling theorem; Paganin & Press, 2006), zF ¼ p d 2 1  M ¼ p d 2 1  R2 R1 ; ð2Þ where R2 is the distance of the image plane to the focal plane and R1 is the distance of the grating to the focal plane (see Fig. 2). The pitch of the detected interferogram d2 will be equally scaled by the magniﬁcation, d2 ¼ d1 R2 R1 : ð3Þ Combining scaled equation for the fractional Talbot distance (2) and with geometric relation for the distances, R2 ¼ R1 þ zF; ð4Þ we obtain the convenient equation reported by Yashiro et al. (2009), R1 ¼ R2 2 1  1  4pd 2 1 R2  1=2 " # : ð5Þ Equation (5) has two solutions for a given Talbot order. The solution with the plus sign means that the grating position is closer to the imaging plane, and that with the minus sign refers to the grating placed closer to the focal plane. If the latter option is used, high magniﬁcation and angular sensitivity can be achieved. The interferogram measured downstream of the phase grating has the same spatial structure as the original phase grating with the best resemblance at the fractional Talbot distances. Any 2D periodic structure can be expressed using notation known from crystallography as I0ðrÞ ¼ X 1 h;k ¼ 1 ahk exp i ha þ kb ð Þ  r ½ ; ð6Þ where a and b are the reciprocal lattice vectors and h, k are integers (Miller indices). If we set real space vectors of the periodic pattern |a| = |b| and the angle between them equal to /2 we obtain a checkerboard lattice. The wavefront shape with residual distortions (aberrations), that we want to recover, is modulated on this periodic pattern at the detector plane as a vectorial displacement ﬁeld u(r) of the ideal pattern (Fig. 2). The displacement ﬁeld is given approximately by uðrÞ ’  2 R2 R1 R2  R1 ð ÞraðrÞ; ð7Þ where a(r) refers to the aspheric component of the wavefront phase. This is an approximation in the case of large grating shear, which is discussed further below. The intensity distri- bution at the detector plane in the presence of a distortion ﬁeld is given as IðrÞ ¼ I0 r  uðrÞ ½  ¼ X 1 h;k ¼ 1 ahk exp i ha þ kb ð Þ  r  uðrÞ ½    ¼ X 1 h;k ¼ 1 ahk exp i qhk  r  qhk  uðrÞ     ¼ X 1 h;k ¼ 1 chk: ð8Þ We call the coefﬁcients chk complex visibility containing amplitude ahk and the displacement ﬁeld is located around the corresponding carrier fringe with frequency qhk. The ampli- tude coefﬁcients ahk vary along the optical axis and the local maxima are located at the corresponding fractional Talbot distances. It is also clear that around each carrier peak the research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2019). 26, 1115–1126 Matthew Seaberg et al.  Wavefront sensing at XFELs 1117 Figure 2 Operation principle of the single-phase-grating method for wavefront shape measurement; v is the unit vector in the direction of qhk.

[PAGE 4] measured displacement only has a component in the direction of the vector qhk. Therefore, in order to extract the full displacement ﬁeld, at least two carrier peaks with reciprocal vectors not parallel to each other need to be analyzed. The zero-order term c00 = a00 represents the unperturbed intensity of the background. This term is used to obtain the amplitude of the wavefront. However, due to the fact that this method is in its principle shearing interferometry, the zero-order term contains shifted replicas resulting in blur of the demodulated amplitude (Servin et al., 2007). This can be neglected if the shear is smaller than the resolution element (period of the fringe). In the case of larger shear, the amplitude cannot be reconstructed uniquely and the extracted phase during the demodulation is the phase differ- ence between two shifted beams at the detector plane, which is recovered using the Fourier method (Takeda et al., 1982; Servin et al., 2007). The differential phase can be obtained uniquely by applying the shear transfer function on the phase difference data (Elster & Weinga¨rtner, 1999), but due to poles of the shear transfer function regularization has to be applied. An additional consideration in the choice of grating shear is the trade-off between sensitivity and dynamic range. As shear (and thus sensitivity) is increased, the fringes may begin to blur together in the case of large aspheric wavefront slopes. Further analysis of the inﬂuence of the shearing ratio on the X-ray wavefront data will be the scope of our future work. The checkerboard  and /2 phase gratings used for this study are shown in Fig. 3. The Si grating [Fig. 3(a)] has a pitch along the diagonal 2.725 mm, the height of the structure is 11 mm giving  phase shift at 9 keV and was patterned by reactive ion etching into Si substrate (Rutishauser et al., 2011). A second Si grating [Fig. 3(b)] has a pitch along the diagonal 14.142 mm, the height of the structure is 12 mm giving  phase shift at 9.5 keV. The patterning was performed with electron beam lithography into a hydrogen silsesquioxane resist, which was used as a mask to etch into the silicon (Liu et al., 2018). The last grating [Figs. 3(c) and 3(d)] is a diamond grating with a pitch along the diagonal of 2.828 mm and structure height of 2.932 mm, giving /2 phase shift at 8 keV. The grating has been patterned by electron beam lithography of chemical vapor deposition (CVD) diamond membrane (Makita et al., 2017). To understand the performance of the single-grating inter- ferometer we performed scans of the phase gratings along the optical axis in the ‘minus geometry’ in equation (5) and recorded a series of images. For fair comparison we used two types,  silicon and /2 diamond phase shifting gratings, shown in Figs. 3(a) and 3(d), and analyzed the visibility of the basic and mixed harmonics (Fig. 4). The detection was made with a scintillator-based, 4.5 microscope (Optique Peter white beam microscope with Andor Zyla 5.5 camera). The distance from focus to grating is displayed on the x-axis of the plots in Figs. 4(a) and 4(e) for the two gratings, and the distance from focus to detector was ﬁxed at 1.925 m. Figs. 4(a) and 4(e) show the visibility of the basic harmonics (diagonal direction) and mixed harmonics (0 and 90 ) direction of the two gratings. Interestingly the mixed harmonics for the  grating are reaching nearly the same visibility as the basic harmonics while in the case of the /2 grating the mixed harmonics are suppressed. Therefore if one wants to have sensitivity in more than two directions using checkerboard gratings the  grating is a more suitable choice. The short-period oscillations on the visibility curves especially for basic harmonics are caused by optical power ﬂowing to higher orders. Further measurements were made using the 14.1 mm  phase silicon grating [Fig. 3(b)]. This grating was placed at 478 mm from the focus, with the detector again located at 1.925 m from the focus. These measurements were used for the phase plate alignment, discussed in Section 4, and for comparison with the speckle tracking method, discussed in Section 5. The precise grating-to-focus and focus-to-detector distances have been calibrated using the longitudinal scan of the grating along the optical axis. For each position the fringe size in the given direction has been measured and the magniﬁcation was determined from the known grating geometry. Data where research papers 1118 Matthew Seaberg et al.  Wavefront sensing at XFELs J. Synchrotron Rad. (2019). 26, 1115–1126 Figure 3 The  and /2 phase gratings used in the single-phase-grating setup. (a) Si  grating, d1 = 2.725 mm, height h = 11 mm; (b) Si  grating, d1 = 14.142 mm, h = 12 mm; (c,d) CVD diamond /2 phase grating, d1 = 2.282 mm, h = 2.932 mm.

[PAGE 5] visibility for the given harmonic was below 15% have not been considered as the error in determination of the fringe size was high. The magniﬁcation curve has then been ﬁtted by least- squares method. An example for the distances calibration of the Si  phase shifting grating, with diagonal pitch size 2.725 mm, using the 45 oriented diagonal fringe is shown in Fig. 5. This is the most important calibration step; however, to obtain more accurate results any detector aberrations can be mapped as well. This can be done by, for example, placing an absorbing grid directly in front of the scintillator or by scan- ning the detector in directions perpendicular to the beam. The tilt of the grating with respect to the detector (and beam) can be recovered via a rotational scan of the grating around the optical axis. 3.2. Dual grating Talbot interferomety (moire´ deflectometry) The next at-wavelength wavefront diagnostic method discussed in this report is the X-ray grating interferometry (XGI) method, realized for measurements in the moire´ mode. The wavefront properties in shot-to-shot LCLS SASE operation, propagated to a pair of hard X-ray offset mirrors at the XPP beamline, have already been investigated in moire´ mode (Rutishauser et al., 2012). Here we describe a similar setup in which the spatially coherent radiation was further monochromated with a double-crystal monochromator to 9.5 keVand focused by means of a set of compound refractive lenses as schematically depicted in Fig. 6(a). The instrument, seen in Fig. 1(d), developed at the Swiss Light Source X05DA Optics beamline (Flechsig et al., 2009), is a modular, compact, transportable and self-contained moire´ XGI setup. In the moire´ mode the incident X-ray beam is diffracted by periodic, micrometre-sized binary structures just like in single-phase- grating interferometry discussed in Section 3.1. The X-ray wavefronts propagating through the grating have small shear angles and create an interference pattern. Due to the Talbot effect, the interference has maximum contrast at certain, discrete distances downstream of the ﬁrst grating. These are the locations where the diffraction orders overlap and inter- ferences occur creating self-images of the grating at speciﬁc research papers J. Synchrotron Rad. (2019). 26, 1115–1126 Matthew Seaberg et al.  Wavefront sensing at XFELs 1119 Figure 5 Distances calibration of Si -phase shifting grating with diagonal pitch size 2.725 mm. Figure 4 Comparison of visibility variation along the optical axis for basic (45 and 125 direction) and mixed harmonics (0 and 90 direction) for /2 diamond (a) and  Si (d) phase checkerboard gratings. The pitch in the diagonal direction was 2.8 mm for the diamond grating and 2.725 mm for the Si grating. Vertical lines in the graphs represent the theoretical positions for the Talbot distances (black) and fractional Talbot distances for basic (red) and mixed (green) harmonics. The interferograms (b,c,e,f) shown are taken from the ﬁrst maxima for the basic harmonics. The scale bar represents 100 mm. For the analysis of the visibility the area marked with red squares in (b) and (e) was used. The locations and sizes of these regions of interest were chosen for visibility analysis based on the nearly uniform illumination within these areas.

[PAGE 6] distances called fractional Talbot distances. The best diffrac- tion efﬁciency of the diffracting grating into the 1st diffraction order is obtained with binary -phase shifting gratings and a duty cycle of 0.5. Maximum contrast for the constructive interference pattern at fractional Talbot orders depends on the wavelength and periodicity of the phase grating. Contrary to single-phase-grating Talbot inter- ferometry, a second grating is inserted in front of the detector and used as a transmission mask (which has a period matching the one of the interference pattern). The interference pattern produced by the ﬁrst grating at the distance PA, where the second absorption grating is located, is magniﬁed from the expected self-referenced image by the design magniﬁcation of the interferometer [M = (FP + PA)/FP]. We note that the period of the second grating was designed to match the self- image of the phase grating in the diverging beam (Rutish- auser, 2013). The moire´ XGI experiment was optimized for 9.5 keV photon energy by considering the available space downstream of the CRL stack. For divergence matching a periodicity of 3.75 mm was used for the ﬁrst grating P and the absorption grating had the same duty cycle with periodicity of 2 mm. By optimizing the spatial illumination and visibility of moire´ interferograms at the detector plane we found that the 11th fractional Talbot order gave best results, while main- taining a compact 15.7 cm distance between the two gratings. more detailed description of the moire´ XGI setup optimized for various setups has been given by Krempasky´ et al. (2018). Figs. 6(b)–6(d) summarize the calibration of the moire´ XGI which in our case is based on rotating the phase and absorbing gratings with respect to each other around the optical axis. The moire´ patterns seen in Fig. 6(b) are integrated over 100 shots to achieve sufﬁcient moire´ fringe visibility. For a quantitative analysis Fig. 6(c) shows a calibration scan by recording the moire´ patterns at varying angular orientations of the absorp- tion grating. The fringe periods px and py in the horizontal and vertical directions are extracted via two-dimensional Fourier analysis. For -phase shifting gratings the interference fringe period and the absorption grating period are connected through orientation angles  denoted in Fig. 6(a), that can be obtained from a minimization procedure of data in Fig. 6(c) research papers 1120 Matthew Seaberg et al.  Wavefront sensing at XFELs J. Synchrotron Rad. (2019). 26, 1115–1126 Figure 6 (a) Schematic layout of the moire´ XGI experimental setup at the SLAC XPP beamline. The XFEL pulses with 9.5 keV photon energy are focused with a stack of 20 compound refractive lenses followed by a corrective phase plate for diffraction-limited focusing. The grating interferometer was installed further downstream, consisting of phase (P) and absorption (A) gratings. Red arrows indicate moire´ fringe periods px and py extracted via two- dimensional Fourier analysis (see text). (b) Selected moire´ interferograms measured by rotating the absorption grating; (c) with extracted moire´ fringe frequencies px and py in the horizontal and vertical directions for calibration. (d) Angular calibration of the moire´ XGI, vertical arrows indicate the relative  offset between the two gratings indicated in panel (a).