[PAGE 1] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 64 (2021) 409–420 Available online 10 February 2021 1526-6125/© 2021 The Society of Manufacturing Engineers. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Effects of drilling strategies for CFRP/Ti stacks on static mechanical property and fatigue behavior of open-hole CFRP laminates Qinglong An a,*, Bingfu Zhong a, Xianfeng Wang b, Hongzhou Zhang b, Xiaofeng Sun b, Ming Chen a a School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, PR China b Shanghai Aircraft Manufacturing Factory, Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China, Shanghai, PR China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: CFRP/Ti stack Drilling strategy Hole defect Tensile strength Fatigue life Fracture mechanism A B S T R A C T Hybrid carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP)/titanium alloy (Ti) stacks are the key load-bearing components in the aircraft structure. However, CFRP/Ti stack has poor machinability and defects are easily caused in the drilling process, resulting in the reduction of fatigue performance for aircraft structural parts. In this paper, the effects of drilling strategies on static mechanical property and fatigue behavior of open-hole CFRP laminates were studied by quasi-static tensile tests and fatigue tests. When drilling CFRP/Ti stacks from CFRP side, due to the hole defects of CFRP caused by Ti6Al4V chips, the ultimate tensile strength and fatigue life of open-hole CFRP laminates decrease by 12.5 % and 75.8 %, respectively. When drilling CFRP/Ti stacks from Ti6Al4V side, due to the drilling defects of CFRP caused by the high drilling temperature and delamination, the ultimate tensile strength and fatigue life of open-hole CFRP laminates decrease by 5.8 % and 26.5 %, respectively. 1. Introduction Carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) has been widely used in the aerospace industry [1–5]. Due to its high brittleness and poor bonding strength with resin, CFRP has low interlayer strength and poor impact resistance. CFRP/alloy stacks are always applied in aircraft, and the joint structure is the weak link in the application [6–10]. In large pas­ senger aircrafts, such as COMAC C919 and Boeing 787, there are mainly three joint methods—CFRP/CFRP, CFRP/Ti, and CFRP/Al. Among them, the CFRP/Ti stack is the most difficult to machine [11]. Titanium alloys and CFRP are two typical difficult-to-machine materials with distinct machining properties. Hole defects are important factors affecting the performance of CFRP components. In the CFRP drilling process, in addition to the hole defects in traditional metal cutting, such as the errors of the hole size, roundness, verticality, etc., delamination which is unique to the CFRP material also exists [12]. In the CFRP/Ti stack drilling process, titanium alloy can be used as auxiliary support for CFRP drilling to avoid the delamination at the hole exit [13]. However, the quality of hole wall will be affected by many factors. The high-speed friction between the titanium alloy high-temperature chips and the CFRP hole wall will also affect the accuracy and quality of the hole wall [14–18]. Cutting heat, built-up edge, exit burrs, and high-temperature chips during Ti6Al4V drilling would affect the hole quality [19–23]. In particular, high-temperature titanium alloy chips can cause great erosion damage to the hole wall, thus affecting the hole machining ac­ curacy [7,24,25]. Machining damage leads to the decrease of hole wall accuracy and quality [1–3], which further affects the strength and fa­ tigue performance of aircraft structural parts. During the flight of the aircraft, the joint structure is subjected to complex mechanical and thermal load. Almost about 80 % of aircraft structural failures were caused by fatigue damage [26,27]. For CFRP/Ti stack drilling, different drilling strategies would have different machining mechanisms that can result in different machining defects. When the drilling sequence is CFRP→Ti, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the high-temperature ribbon chips generated in Ti6Al4V drilling process would squeeze and scratch on the CFRP hole-wall during the chip removal process. Thereby, severe scratching and burning effects are generated on the CFRP hole-wall (especially at the CFRP-Ti interface region), and the hole accuracy is lowered. Therefore, it is vital important to control chip size and remove chips in time during drilling CFRP/Ti stacks. When the drilling sequence is Ti→CFRP, as shown in Fig. 1(b), a large amount of cutting heat is generated in Ti6Al4V drilling process, and high cutting temperature would cause severe thermal damage to the * Corresponding author. E-mail address: qlan@sjtu.edu.cn (Q. An). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Manufacturing Processes journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/manpro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2021.01.036 Received 7 November 2020; Received in revised form 21 January 2021; Accepted 22 January 2021

[PAGE 2] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 64 (2021) 409–420 410 hole-wall, especially at the Ti-CFRP interface region. In addition, due to the lack of support at the exit of the CFRP laminates, machining defects such as delamination and splitting are highly prone to occur [12]. Reducing the drilling temperature and CFRP laminates- exit delamina­ tion is helpful to improve the hole quality. In the drilling process of CFRP, defects such as interlayer delami­ nation, microcracks, subsurface damage, fiber pull-out, etc., result in complex stress distribution at the edge of the hole, which tends to cause stress concentration, resulting in a serious drop in bearing performance. Unlike metal materials, the fatigue failure mechanism of CFRP is complicated due to its anisotropy and non-uniformity. Many scholars have studied the loading performance and damage mechanism of CFRP bolt loaded holes. Cutting edge micro-geometry and topography changes when drilling carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) are monitored by Raj and Karunamoorthy [28]. The influence of flute number and stepped bit design was experimentally investigated by Alonso et al. [29]. Confocal and SEM microscopy were used to analyze the evolution of the cutting-edge micro-geometry and the dominant wear modes. Li et al. [30] studied the effect of typical parameters including traverse speed, hydraulic pressure, stand-off distance and stack configuration on machined quality with experimental data relating to kerf characteristics and surface integrity. The properties of a cemented carbide tool substrate and diamond coating were studied by Hwang and Ahn [31] for the precision drilling of carbon fiber-reinforced plastic (CFRP). An et al. [32–34] carried out a series of investigation on the cutting CFRP. The results revealed [33] that the cutting mechanism under parallel fiber cutting conditions is the interface layering separa­ tion dominated by in-plane shear stress and the machined surface is relatively flat and smooth. Then, the authors [34] presented that the drilling sequence does play an important role in determining the involved machining responses of CFRP/Ti stacks. These research results show that the damage of CFRP during processing can be reduced by a reasonable drilling strategy, thereby improving the bearing strength and fatigue life of CFRP structures. In this paper, the tensile property and fatigue behavior of open-hole CFRP laminates with different drilling strategies were evaluated by quasi-static tensile tests and dynamic fatigue tests. The mechanism of static tensile/fatigue damage of CFRP laminates with open-hole was also revealed. The purpose of the present study is to explore a low-damage drilling process of CFRP/Ti stacks. It can provide a guideline for the optimization of the drilling process of CFRP/Ti stacks. 2. Experimental procedures 2.1. Workpiece materials The specimens used in the experiments were T800/X850 CFRP [32] laminates with [+45/-45/0/45/0/0/-45/90/45/0/-45/0/-45/90/45/0] lay-up and Ti6Al4V plates with a size of 300 mm × 200 mm. The thickness of T800/X850 laminates is 5.3 mm and that of Ti6Al4V plate is 6.35 mm. The composition of T800/X850 CFRP is shown in Table 1. As shown in Table 2, there are significant differences between the two materials in physical and mechanical properties such as elongation, linear thermal expansion coefficient, and thermal conductivity. Fig. 2 shows the microstructure of T800/X850 CFRP laminates which have obvious interfaces and anisotropy between each layer. Within one layer, carbon fibers are “embedded” in the resin matrix, and are evenly distributed. The diameter of single carbon fiber is about 7 μm. Ti6Al4V alloy consists of α + β phases. The light-colored α phase grain is about 5−15 μm, and the β phase distributes in α phases with deep color. 2.2. Specimens The quasi-static tensile and fatigue tests of open-hole CFRP laminates were carried out according to national standards of GB 1447-2005-T and GB/T 16779-2008, where the standard GB 1447-2005-T is published by Standardization Administration of the P.R.C for test conditions for isotropic and orthotropic fiber-reinforced plastics composi­ tes—determination of tensile properties and the standard GB/T 16779- 2008 is published by Standardization Administration of the P.R.C for test methods for tension-tension fatigue of fiber-reinforced plastic lam­ inates. The quasi-static tensile test was first conducted to determine the magnitude of fatigue load. Therefore, the same kind of specimens was used in the two tests. The schematic diagram of the CFRP laminates for tests is shown in Fig. 3. The open-hole in the middle of the CFRP specimen was obtained by three drilling methods as shown in Fig. 4. When drilling CFRP/Ti stacks, 12 fastening bolts were used to connect the two material closely, so as to reduce the gap between the two materials as much as possible. The drilling parameters are shown in Table 3. The drilling bit used in the experiment is an uncoated cemented carbide drill with the geometry parameter of diameter 6.35 mm, helix angle 30◦, tip angle 140◦and the Fig. 1. Machining damages during drilling of CFRP/Ti stacks in conventional drilling process. Table 1 Composition of T800/X850 CFRP laminate [32]. Reinforcing material Matrix material Fiber Volume Content Fiber Bundle T800 X850 65% 5 μm, 12K Q. An et al.

[PAGE 3] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 64 (2021) 409–420 411 cutting-edge length 34 mm. When drilling CFRP/Ti stack, the drilling defects of CFRP laminates could mainly be attributed to the mechanical and thermal damage caused by Ti6Al4V chips (Test A), and the delam­ ination damage after drilling out of the laminate (Test B and Test C). When drilling CFRP laminate alone, a plastic plate was placed under the CFRP laminate to avoid the delamination damage. The pretreatment and the prepared CFRP specimens are shown in Fig. 5. The drilling tests were conducted on HURCO VMX42 three-axis vertical machining center. The specimens were placed on a special fixture. The cutting tool used in the test was SECO solid carbide un­ coated internal cooling bit. After drilling, the specimens were processed with a special herringbone tooth milling cutter for fiber reinforced Fig. 2. Microstructure of the tested CFRP/Ti stack. Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of CFRP specimen. Table 2 Basic mechanical/physical properties of the used CFRP/Ti stacks [34]. Material Tensile Strength (MPa) Elongation (%) Density(g/ cm3) Elastic Modulus (GPa) Linear Coefficient of Thermal Expansion (10−6⋅◦C -1) Thermal Conductivity(W/ (g⋅◦C)) T800/ X850 2840 1.5 1.60 168 ~0 ~1.0 Ti6Al4V 950 8 4.43 113 9.1 7.0 Q. An et al.

[PAGE 4] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 64 (2021) 409–420 412 Fig. 5. Preparing process of the finished specimens. Fig. 6. Experimental setup of quasi-static tensile tests. Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the drilling tests. (a) Test A, (b) Test B, (c) Test C. Table 3 Drilling parameters. No. Drilling process Drilling parameters Test A CFRP→Ti vc =10 m/min, f = 0.06 mm/rev Test B Ti→CFRP Test C CFRP Q. An et al.

[PAGE 5] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 64 (2021) 409–420 413 composite materials, and each side of the samples were polished with polishing sandpaper. In order to avoid the damage caused by the fixtures to the surface of CFRP laminates, 7075 aluminum alloy sheets were attached to both ends of the specimens. Acrylic acid was used to bond the aluminum alloy sheets with CFRP laminates. 2.3. Mechanical testing As shown in Fig. 6, the quasi-static tensile tests were carried out using a Zwick/Roell Z100 tensile test machine. During the quasi-static tensile tests, the load was adopted, and the crosshead speed was set as 0.5 mm/min. The pre-tension load was set at 500 N. Each group of tests was repeated three times, and the average value was taken as the tensile strength of the open-hole CFRP laminates. The dynamic fatigue tests were carried out on LFV-100HH hydraulic servo fatigue test machine. The maximum range of the machine is ±50 kN, and the load accuracy is 1%. The real-time load data was recorded during the test, and the acquisition frequency was 100 Hz. Fig. 7 shows the stress-time curves in the fatigue test, where Smin is the minimum stress, Smax is the maximum stress, Sa is the stress amplitude, Sm is the average stress, and the stress ratio is R = Smin/Smax. According to the national standard of GB/T 16779-2008, the maximum stress level was set as 85 % of the average static ultimate tensile strength, the stress ratio was set as 0.1, the maximum tensile load was 6.97 kN, and the minimum tensile load was 0.697 kN. The loading frequency was 10 Hz. Load control loading was adopted, and the load-time curves were sinusoidal. The air blower was used to cool the specimens during the fatigue tests. The FLIR A615 infrared thermal imager was used to monitor the surface temperature of the workpiece in real-time to ensure that the surface temperature was always below 35 ℃. The experimental setup was shown in Fig. 7. Each group of tests was repeated three times. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Hole quality of CFRP laminates Fig. 8 shows the SEM images of the hole-wall surface when drilling sequence is CFRP→Ti. As shown from the figure, the hole-wall is seri­ ously damaged when drilling CFRP/Ti stack from CFRP side. There are a number of scratches distributed on the hole-wall. The closer to the exit of CFRP laminates, the more obvious the scratches are. In addition, there are also obvious resin burns near the exit of CFRP laminates [30]. When drilling CFRP/Ti stack from CFRP side, Ti6Al4V chips scratch the hole-wall of CFRP laminate. The scratching between Ti6Al4V chips and the hole-wall of CFRP layer makes the chip removal more difficult and even blocks the spiral groove of the drill. When drilling titanium alloy, high cutting speed may cause sticky chips in the absence of cooling and lubrication. Fig. 9 shows the hole-wall morphology of the CFRP laminates when drilling the CFRP/Ti stacks from Ti6Al4V side. As compared with Fig. 8, the surface quality of the hole-wall is significantly improved, and there is no obvious scratch on the surface. However, when drilling CFRP from Ti6Al4V side, the drilling temperature is higher than the vitrification temperature of the resin, which accelerates fiber-resin debonding and fiber pulling out, leading to surface pit defects. Since the CFRP chips are soft compared to Ti-alloy, they will not damage the Ti6Al4V surface that has been formed. Fig. 10 shows the SEM morphologies of Ti6Al4V chips when drilling with different strategies. It shows that the Ti6Al4V chips were squeezed by the CFRP hole-wall in irregular shape when drilling CFRP/Ti stacks from CFRP side, while the regular spiral Ti6Al4V chips were obtained when drilling from Ti6Al4V side. Fig. 11 shows the hole-wall morphology when drilling only CFRP laminates. It can be seen that the surface of the hole-wall is smooth under the cutting speed of 10 m/min. There are no obvious defects visible above as the deboning of fiber-resin and fiber pull out. In sum­ mary, when drilling CFRP/Ti stack from CFRP side, the main drilling defect is the erosion of the CFRP hole-wall by Ti6Al4V chips, including scratches, resin ablation and sticky chips. When drilling CFRP/Ti stack from Ti6Al4V side, pits on the surface and thermal damage of resin are the main drilling defects. When drilling only CFRP laminate, there are no obvious defects visible. 3.2. Static mechanical properties and fracture morphologies of CFRP The load-displacement curves and the fractured specimens after quasi-static tensile tests are shown in Fig. 12. There is a linear rela­ tionship between load and deformation. The CFRP specimens basically Fig. 7. Experimental setup of tensile-tensile fatigue tests. Q. An et al.

[PAGE 6] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 64 (2021) 409–420 414 have no yield process, showing a typical brittle fracture. The maximum tensile load is between 7 kN and 9 kN, and the maximum deformation is between 0.12 mm and 0.14 mm. The quasi-static ultimate tensile strength which is the maximum stress at the minimum cross-section can be calculated by Eq. (1). The calculated results are shown in Table 4. σb = Fmax (W −D)h (1) Where, Fmax is the ultimate tensile load, W is the width of the narrowest position in the middle of the sample, D is the hole diameter, and h is the thickness of CFRP laminates. Fig. 13 shows the quasi-static ultimate tensile strength with different drilling methods. Due to the heterogeneity of microstructure, internal defects and brittle fracture properties of CFRP materials, the difference in quasi-static ultimate tensile strength is significant. The average ulti­ mate tensile strength of open-hole CFRP laminates is about 423.88 MPa. In terms of the drilling defects, the quasi-static ultimate tensile strength of CFRP laminates decreases by 12.5 % and 5.8 % when drilling CFRP/Ti stacks from CFRP side to Ti6Al4V side, respectively. Table 5 shows the tensile fracture morphologies of open-hole CFRP laminates. The scratches of Ti6Al4V cause defects like micro-cracks and delamination on the surface of the CFRP hole-wall. During the quasi- static tensile tests, stress concentration occurs at the defect position, where the fractures are more likely to occur. Compared to CFRP/Ti stack drilling, the fracture surface obtained by drilling CFRP laminate alone has less delamination and higher tensile strength. It is mainly because the layers of ±45◦are basically resin fractures, breaking along the transverse direction of carbon fiber. 3.3. Fatigue properties and fracture morphologies of CFRP As shown in Fig. 14, the fatigue failure specimens show a similar fracture characteristic with static testing. The delamination fracture of the specimens is obvious, which shows that the delamination damage is more serious during the fatigue process. The load-deformation curves of tensile fatigue tests are shown in Fig. 15. It can be seen that the deformation of the fatigue failure spec­ imens is between 0.6 mm and 0.7 mm, which is much larger than that of 0.12−0.14 mm in static tensile tests. It is mainly because there are more Fig. 8. SEM images of the hole-wall surface when drilling sequence is CFRP→Ti with vc =10 m/min, f = 0.06 mm/rev. Q. An et al.