[PAGE 1] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 311 (2023) 117821 Available online 17 November 2022 0924-0136/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Materials Processing Tech. journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jmatprotec Effects of recast layer on fatigue performance of laser-drilled holes in nickel-based superalloy Tinglian Zhang a, Huang Yuan a,b,∗, Min Cai c a Tsinghua University, School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing 100084, China b Tsinghua University, Institute for Aero Engines, Beijing 100084, China c AVIC Beijing Aeronautical Manufacturing Technology Institute, Beijing 100024, China A R T I C L E I N F O Associate Editor: Adam Thomas Clare Keywords: Laser-drilled holes Recast layer Cyclic plasticity Fatigue life Nickel-based superalloy A B S T R A C T The effects of the recast layer on the fatigue performance of laser-drilled holes in Ni-based superalloy were experimentally and computationally investigated. It was found that millisecond-laser drilling leads to a recast layer of about 10 μm, whereas no recast layer was observed in the picosecond-laser drilled hole. The recast layer was confirmed to reveal the Niobium segregation, the Laves phase precipitation and small lattice distortions, resulting in low yield stress. In-situ fatigue test results indicated that the recast layer does not show an obvious influence on the fatigue life of the holed structures in the low-cycle fatigue regime. With the help of the developed cyclic plasticity model, computational analysis verified that the recast layer significantly decreased the stress concentrations around the hole root. The shielding effects improved the fatigue performance of the mismatched material system. The investigations confirm that the millisecond-laser-drilled holes can be used in high-performance turbine blades sofar the recast layer does not dominate the fatigue process, which provides new insights into laser manufacturing. 1. Introduction Nickel-based superalloys are widely used in aerospace industries for their excellent high-temperature creep strength, corrosion resistance and fatigue performance. Subasi et al. (2022) pointed out that increas- ing turbine inlet temperature demands the development of cooling holes in aero-engine components, such as hot section turbine blades, nozzle guide vanes and combustion chambers. Currently, Li et al. (2019) claimed that laser drilling (LD), electric discharge machine (EDM) and electro-stream machining (ESM) are widely applied in industries. Zhang and Zhang (2021c) reported that laser processing found special attention for its high processing efficiency, non-contact manner and high flexibility in drilling, cutting and welding difficult- to-machine materials and complicated structures. Guo et al. (2021) contended that LD can machine special geometry which is not appli- cable for conventional machining, e.g. for small deep holes < 0.5 mm. However, Gautam and Pandey (2018) pointed out that laser drilling is not flawless, which usually leads to the formation of high roughness, microcracks, oxidation defects and most importantly, the recast layer, which could diminish the fatigue performance. Hence, it is important to identify different drilling methods on the mechanical properties and fatigue performance of holed components. ∗Corresponding author. E-mail address: yuan.huang@tsinghua.edu.cn (H. Yuan). Garofano et al. (2009) contended that the recast layer or recast zone (RZ) usually refers to the remaining molten material that is not vaporized or ejected away during the laser drilling process and re- solidifies to cover the hole surface. Ghorbanpour et al. (2022) found that the formation of RZ is inevitable in many laser manufacturing processes. Guo et al. (2020) reported that it is usually accompanied by micro/macro elemental segregation, phase transformation, grain re- crystallization, etc. Correspondingly, Xu et al. (2019) reported that RZ significantly changes the stress concentration, mechanical performance and fatigue damage of the holes. Recently, Duan et al. (2016) claimed that the development of ultra-short laser facilitates the formation of very high-quality holes, such as very thin or even no RZ, due to its unique laser–matter interaction mechanism. However, Zhang et al. (2021a) found that ultra-short laser (pulse duration 𝜏< 10−11s) means unbearable processing time compared with long-pulse laser drilling (𝜏> 10−6s), which significantly limits its actual applications. Hence, quantifying the effect of the recast layer on the fatigue damage of laser-drilled holes is essential. In the past decades, the effects of laser drilling processing, especially the recast layer, on the fatigue strength of nickel-based superalloys were extensively reported. Petru et al. (2021) reported that the recast layer and microcracks in the base material have a noteworthy effect https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2022.117821 Received 30 July 2022; Received in revised form 3 November 2022; Accepted 12 November 2022

[PAGE 2] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 311 (2023) 117821 2 T. Zhang et al. Table 1 Nominal elemental compositions (wt.%) of the investigated Inconel 718 in the present work. Element C Mn Si P Cr Ni Mo Nb Ti Al Cu Fe Co IN718 0.02 0.05 0.06 0.007 18.53 53.44 3.06 5.3 0.99 0.56 0.04 17.71 0.023 on the strength degradation in laser-drilled parts. Xavior et al. (2018) contended that the recast layer with the thickness of 20∼70 μm leads to significant changes in the mechanical and fatigue characteristics of Inconel 718. Morar et al. (2017) reported that the recast layer and coupling surface anomalies cause a reduction in corrosion fatigue life of laser-drilled CMSX-4 holes by 30∼50% at 850 ◦C and introduced a processing damage factor to consider the recast layer thickness ef- fect. Li et al. (2021) utilized the equivalent initial flaw size theory to predict the fatigue life of nickel-based superalloy upon different drilling processes and achieved good agreements. Liang et al. (2016) found that picosecond-laser drilling results in better fatigue life of holed specimens than nanosecond ones and correlated with microscopic fracture morphology. Moreover, Kersey et al. (2013) investigated the thermomechanical fatigue life of laser-drilled holes but overlooked the effect of microstructural heterogeneity at the hole root. However, the effect of strength degradation in the recast layer on the stress redistribution at the hole root was seldom investigated. Zhang and Yuan (2022b) reported that the laser-induced recasting material usually has much lower mechanical strength than the base Ni-based su- peralloy for the reduction of strengthening phases, which would affect the stress states at the hole root greatly, especially under complicated fatigue loadings. It is difficult but important to decouple the influence of different laser drilling defects on fatigue damage and quantify the fatigue life differences induced by the recast layer only. In the present work, millisecond and picosecond lasers were used to fabricate the holed samples with different thicknesses of the recast layer. The microstructural characteristics of the recast zone on the hole root were analyzed by detailed material characterization. In-situ fatigue tests at 650 ◦C were conducted to quantify the effect of the recast layer on fatigue performance. The deformation and failure mech- anisms upon different loading levels were studied by systematic EBSD characterization and metallographic analysis. Finally, the distributions and evolutions of the laser-drilled holes were quantified with the help of finite element computations, aiming to assess the fatigue damage differences induced by the recast zone. The present results can be extended to assess other laser-manufactured structures. 2. Materials and experiments 2.1. Material and specimen preparation Inconel 718 (IN718), which is widely used in the aircraft and aerospace industries, was selected as the investigated material to per- form the laser drilling experiments. It was heat-treated following the standard (ASTM B, 2007) and the corresponding nominal chemical compositions are summarized in Table 1, where the minor compositions less than 0.1% are not included. Picosecond and millisecond lasers were used to manufacture the holes with different thicknesses of the recast layer, aiming to inves- tigate the effect of the recast layer on the mechanical performance of laser-drilled holes. The prepared samples included the plates for microstructural analysis and in-situ fatigue samples for fatigue experi- ments, both specimen thickness of which is 1 mm. Morar et al. (2018) reported that the quality and geometry of the laser-drilled hole have significant dependence on the processing parameters, especially the laser energy density and pulse duration. Five-axis picosecond process- ing machine with the wavelength of 1030 nm, the power of 0–30 W, the duration of 3 ps and the frequency of 125 Hz and five-axis millisecond processing machine with the wavelength of 1064 nm, the power of 0– 200 W, the duration of 0.2–10 ms and the frequency of 1–200 Hz were Fig. 1. The geometry of the laser-drilled in-situ fatigue specimen. used in the present work. The auxiliary gas is helium. The picosecond- laser drilling parameters were set as the average power 𝑃= 30 W, the pulse duration 𝜏= 3 ps and the defocus 𝐿= 0, whereas the millisecond-laser ones correspond to 𝑃= 100 W, 𝜏= 0.3 ms and 𝐿 = 0. Different laser drilling processes lead to different hole quality but also occupy different process times. It took about 2 s to drill a hole with a diameter of 𝐷= 0.5 mm by the millisecond-laser and 15 s by the picosecond-laser. The differences in processing efficiency are significant considering that there are thousands of cooling holes in aero-engine parts. In addition, hole diameters of 0.3 mm and 1.0 mm were also considered in the plate samples. Millisecond and picosecond-laser lead to different recast layers and metallurgical characteristics, which will be discussed in detail in the next sections. 2.2. In-situ fatigue tests In-situ fatigue tests were conducted at 650 ◦C, which is the sta- bilized service temperature of IN718, in the vacuum chamber of the scanning electron microscope (SEM) using a specially designed servo- hydraulic testing system. Resistance coils with adjustable thermocou- ples were used to obtain a stable control of temperature along the gauge length, which reached ±1 ◦C of the nominal temperature during all the tests. The used in-situ fatigue specimens were depicted in Fig. 1, where a perforated hole with 𝐷= 0.5 mm fabricated by the millisecond or picosecond-laser was embedded in the center. The fatigue tests were conducted in load-controlled mode with the stress ratio of 𝑅= 0.1 and the loading frequency of 𝑓= 10 Hz. Different nominal stress levels were considered to establish the fatigue life curves. Crack initiation and propagation characteristics were captured by SEM at different fatigue cycles by pausing the fatigue tests. Then the effect of the recast layer on the fatigue initiation mechanisms of the drilled holes fabricated by the millisecond and picosecond-laser can be identified. 2.3. Metallographic analysis Metallographic analyses were performed during different testing stages. The plate and in-situ fatigue samples were mechanically ground from 1000 Grit to 4000 Grit to ensure the surface quality and then electrochemical polished in the electrolyte of 90% Methanol + 10% Perchloric acid at 20 V for about 30 s to reveal the microstructural characteristics. Before testing, the longitudinal cross-sections of plate samples with the millisecond-laser (MSL) and picosecond-laser (PSL) drilled holes were analyzed by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). Data analyses were performed to obtain the metallographic characteris- tics including inverse pole figure (IPF) color map, local misorientation (LM) map, recrystallization map and twinning boundary (TB) map. SEM coupled with an energy dispersive system (EDS) was used to identify

[PAGE 3] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 311 (2023) 117821 3 T. Zhang et al. Fig. 2. Microstructural morphology of the millisecond-laser-drilled (MSL) hole. (a) Longitudinal cross-section of the hole with 0.5 mm in diameter. The dark compounds are verified to be oxides. (b) Three regions can be identified around the edge of the hole fabricated by the millisecond laser: The oxidation zone (OZ), recast zone (RZ) and base material (BM). (c) Magnification of the Laves phase indicated by white lines in RZ. The corresponding chemical compositions of Point A in the oxidation zone and Point B in the recast zone are depicted in (d) and (e), respectively. the elemental segregation and phase transformation around the hole root, especially in RZ. During testing, SEM images were recorded to capture the crack initiation and deformation characteristics around the hole root on the sample surface. After testing, partially fractured speci- mens were analyzed by SEM to identify the fatigue failure mechanisms, especially the differences induced by the recast layer. Some samples that revealed obvious propagated cracks and stopped the test before the final fracture were analyzed by EBSD to figure out the deformation characteristics upon different loading levels. 3. Experimental results 3.1. Microstructural analysis 3.1.1. Elemental segregation and phase transformation The microstructural morphology of the millisecond-laser (MSL) drilled hole is illustrated in Fig. 2. Gautam and Pandey (2018) con- tended that laser spot area usually can be divided into the irradiated area, melting area and ablation area and the peak energy mainly concentrates on the ablation area. The solid material absorbs the high energy to vaporize, leading to the formation of small-diameter laser-drilled holes. MSL possesses a higher laser energy density and a larger pulse width, which leads to the hole with no taper depicted in Fig. 2(a). The black compounds are verified as oxides by EDS and will be discussed subsequently. Fig. 2(b) illustrates the characteristic morphology of an MSL hole, where three regions can be identified around the hole root. The base material (BM) was not affected by the laser drilling process and main- tains its original metallographic characteristics. The recast zone (RZ) refers to the melted material that was not removed from the molten pool and re-solidified, which underwent significant microstructural and mechanical changes. The oxidation zone (OZ) contains the mixed oxides of various base metals. The chemical compositions of the oxide particle in OZ are depicted in Fig. 2(d), where the compound reveals a significant increase of O, Cr, Nb, Ti and Al as well as the decrease of Ni compared with the base material. The oxide layer is brittle and prone to nucleate the microcracks upon fatigue loadings. The width of RZ is approximately 12 μm, whereas that of OZ is about 2 μm. Further analysis of RZ is delineated in Fig. 2(c) from a magnified view, where the white precipitates were verified as the Laves phase by EDS. The corresponding elemental composition is illustrated in Fig. 2(e), which shows a prominent increase of Niobium, leading to the formation of the Laves −(Ni, Cr, Fe)2(Nb, Mo, Ti) phase. Niobium is the essential strengthening element for forming the strengthening 𝛾′′ −Ni3Nb phase in Inconel 718. Non-equilibrium solidification process resulted in the microsegregation of Niobium, which promoted the phase transformation from 𝛾′′ to Laves. Hence, the strengthening phases in RZ were significantly decreased, which would lead to a decrease in yield and tensile strength. Zhang and Yuan (2022b) found that precipitation strengthening plays a dominant role in the strengthening mechanisms of laser-melting materials. Zhang et al. (2021b) verified that Laves precipitation induces significant strength degradation in RZ by detailed microstructural analysis and instrumented indentation analysis. Dif- ferent laser methods lead to similar recast material due to consistent microstructure. Additionally, Sui et al. (2017) claimed that the brittle Laves phase is prone to provide the crack nucleation sites, which is harmful to the fatigue performance of the recast zone. In summary, the formation of the recast zone and oxidation zone would deplete the strengthening elements, leading to the reduction in mechanical strength and fatigue performance of millisecond drilled holes. Moreover, the microstructural characteristics of the picosecond- laser (PSL) drilled hole is illustrated in Fig. 3. PSL processing has a very small pulse duration, which makes the intersection time between the laser and material very short, leading to the ablation of ions from the material before transferring energy to the surrounding material. As depicted in Fig. 3(a), the diameter of the hole at the exit is slightly

[PAGE 4] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 311 (2023) 117821 4 T. Zhang et al. Fig. 3. Microstructural characterization of the picosecond-laser-drilled (PSL) hole without oxides and recast layer. (a) Longitudinal cross-section of the tapered hole with 1.0 mm in diameter. (b) Magnification of the microstructure around the edge of the hole fabricated by a picosecond-laser. Fig. 4. Detailed microstructural analysis of the laser-drilled holes by EBSD with the MSL hole in (a–c) and the PSL one in (d–f). (a) and (d) The twinning boundary (TB) maps; (b) and (e) the inverse pole figure (IPF) color maps; (c) and (f) the local misorientation (LM) maps. smaller than that at the entrance, i.e. the hole taper, which is hard to avoid in ultra-fast laser machining holes. The taper of the micro- hole depends heavily on the defocusing amount. Fig. 3(b) delineates the magnified microstructure around the edge of the PSL drilled hole. It can be found that there is no oxidation zone or recast zone. Due to the ultrafast laser pulses, the heating energy cannot be transferred to the surrounding material to form the recast zone and heat-affected zone. Hence, the PSL drilled holes are considered to have higher surface quality with no recast layer and oxidation layer, which can provide the comparison baseline for the MSL hole to identify the effect of recast layers on fatigue performance. Besides, different drilling hole diameters reveal similar microstructural characteristics. 3.1.2. Twinning boundary and local misorientation Furthermore, detailed microstructural analyses of the MSL and PSL drilled holes were performed by EBSD with the results depicted in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) delineates the band contrast (BC) map with twinning boundaries (TBs) of the MSL hole. TBs are characterized by the coinci- dence site lattice (CSL) with 60◦(𝛴3). Lu et al. (2009) found that TBs possess a more stable structure as well as lower interface energy than grain boundaries (GBs), which can improve the material’s resistance against oxidation, corrosion and creep. Compared with regular and ample TBs in the base material, there is nearly no TB found in the RZ of the MSL hole. Alternatively, the distributions of TBs are consistent in the PSL drilled holes in Fig. 4(d), i.e. no recast layer. Liang et al. (2019) reported that TB is a potential strengthening mechanism in nickel-based superalloys, which can effectively impede dislocation slips and undergo more plastic deformations to improve mechanical strength and fracture toughness. Hence, the formation of the recast layer is accompanied by the reduction of TBs, which wound further decreases the capability of bearing load and plastic deformations in the recast zone. The grain morphology of the MSL hole is depicted in Fig. 4(b) and compared with that of the PSL one shown in Fig. 4(e). The PSL drilled hole maintains the equiaxed grains as the base material with the size of about 15 μm. Nevertheless, the MSL hole reveals a different crystal structure at the hole root from BM, indicating the RZ. Laser melting ought to stimulate a columnar structure with elongated grains. Limited by the recast layer width, the RZ consisted of a single-layer grain structure with elongated grains along with the sample thickness. The

[PAGE 5] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 311 (2023) 117821 5 T. Zhang et al. crystal orientation of the single grain in RZ is not uniform and reveals graded distributions, indicating the existence of sub-grains and small- angle grain boundaries. On the whole, RZ has similar grain sizes as BM. Hence, the strength of the recasting material offered by grain boundary strengthening is similar to that of the base material. The anisotropy and inhomogeneity in RZ are also negligible. Figs. 4(c) and (f) delineate the distributions of local misorienta- tions (LMs) around the MSL and PSL drilled hole, respectively. It is found that the grains close to the RZ/BM boundary in Fig. 4(c) reveal higher local misorientations. Fukuoka et al. (2002) contended that LMs characterize the orientation difference between the tested data point in each grain and adjacent data points and depend on subtle changes in the orientation inside the grain. The grains in BM that hold the same grain morphology but with higher LMs can be identified as the recasting-affected zone (RAZ), which occupies half of a grain width. The sub-grains in RZ that are adjacent to the RAZ also reveal higher local misorientations, which are ascribed to the effect of thermal gra- dients during the solidification-cooling processes. The growth of RZ is restricted by BM. Local misorientation not only characterizes the resid- ual plastic deformations but also indicates the residual stresses, which would be relaxed upon the accumulation of cyclic plastic deformations and have little effect on the fatigue damage of holed components within the low-cycle fatigue regime. Moreover, Zhang and Yuan (2022b) ver- ified that the strength improvement provided by local misorientations is insignificant compared with the strength degradation offered by the reduction of strengthening phases. Additionally, the PSL fabricated hole presents relatively homogeneous distributions of local distributions. Summarized the microstructural characteristics discussed above, the PSL processed a high-quality hole with no recast layer, whereas the MSL fabricated a hole covered by RZ and OZ. RZ reveals a significant reduction of strengthening 𝛾′/𝛾′′ phases for the formation of Laves phases and the disappearance of twinning boundaries, which inevitably leads to decreased mechanical strength. Considering that the recast layer is too thin to determine the specific mechanical properties even though the nano-indentation technique is considered due to the bound- ary effects, the material property of RZ can be estimated by the laser remelting material due to their similar microstructural characteristics, which is extensively investigated by Zhang and Yuan (2022b). It was verified that the yield strength of RZ is about half of the base material for sufficient experimental and numerical results by Zhang and Yuan (2022b), which is ascribed to the similar phase transformation from 𝛾′′ to Laves. 3.2. In-situ fatigue process The crack initiation characteristics of in-situ fatigue tests with in- creasing fatigue cycles upon lower loads are delineated in Fig. 5, which was real-time recorded by SEM. Figs. 5(a)–(d) correspond to the MSL hole upon 𝑆max = 786 MPa, whereas Figs. 5(e)–(h) are the PSL drilled hole upon 𝑆max = 778 MPa. The crack initiated from the recast layer in the middle plane at about 4 × 104 cycles and then propagated to the sample surface after 500 cycles in the MSL hole. The crack propagated in a zig-zag manner and was accompanied by slip traces. In the PSL drilled hole, the crack seemed to initiate from the hole root and then propagated at a relatively lower rate. An inclined crack with slip lines at the crack tip can be also observed in Fig. 5(h). Fig. 6 illustrates the in-situ observation of crack initiation behaviors of the laser-drilled holes upon higher fatigue loads, where the MSL hole upon 𝑆max = 1021 MPa is depicted in Fig. 6(a)–(c) and the PSL hole upon 𝑆max = 913 MPa is delineated in Fig. 6(d)–(f). Different from the crack initiation upon lower fatigue loads, a higher fatigue load leads to a straight crack initiation manner, however, with significant two slip bands, which are ±45◦inclined to the crack propagation direction. Plastic deformations seem to mainly occur in the ship bands in the MSL hole. Alternatively, in the PSL drilled hole, plastic deformations seem to accumulate earlier at the hole root before the crack nucleation for the absence of the recast layer. Further fatigue cycles promoted the crack initiation from the distorted grains at the hole root. Two main slip bands can be also observed in Fig. 6(f), which are inclined at ±45◦ to the loading direction and occupy a bigger deformation zone. In summary, crack initiation and propagation in laser-drilled holes has a strong correlation with the applied levels. The recast layer could change the plastic deformation behavior at the hole root due to the stress redistributions induced by strength mismatch upon fatigue loads. 3.3. 𝑆−𝑁Fatigue life diagram Fig. 7 illustrates the relationship between the experimental fatigue life 𝑁f and the nominal stress amplitude 𝑆a of the MSL and PSL drilled holes, which are fit by the conventional Basquin’s equation as 𝑆a = 𝐴⋅(𝑁f)𝐵, (1) with 𝐴and 𝐵are the modeling material constants upon the 𝑆−𝑁 diagram. The nominal stress-based fatigue criterion seems not suitable for the transferable fatigue assessment of the drilled holes due to the stress gradients at the hole root but provides a quantified comparison of the holes’ fatigue life fabricated by different processing methods, i.e. identifying the effect of the recast layer. Different from some published works, it can be found that the recast layer does not alter significant changes in the fatigue performance of laser-drilled holes. Fatigue damage in holed samples is related to many factors, which include material properties, surface rough- ness, metallurgical defects, and most importantly, stress concentrations. Strength mismatch leads to a more significant effect on fatigue per- formance than processing defects during the low-cycle fatigue (LCF) stage. For the PSL drilled hole samples, fatigue crack initiation reveals stronger correlations with micro defects and stress concentrations upon lower fatigue loads, whereas plastic deformations are dominated in the fatigue damage process upon higher loads. Correspondingly, the PSL- drilled holes are more sensitive to the specimen geometry and surface characteristics, which leads to a larger fatigue data scattering band. For the MSL drilled hole specimens, the recast layer possesses lower yield stress, which can significantly decrease the stress concentrations at the hole root, especially within the LCF regime. Hence, in the present LCF stage (𝑁f = 104 −105), the effect of the recast layer on the fatigue performance of holed structures is insignificant. More discussions about the recast layer will be introduced in the next section through computational analysis. 3.4. Damage and failure mechanisms To further identify the differences in damage mechanisms induced by the recast layer, detailed EBSD characterizations were performed on the tested MSL and PSL drilled hole samples. The results at lower fatigue loads were depicted in Fig. 8. In the MSL hole, slip lines are restricted to the crack tip and surrounding grains, which can stimulate the increase of local misorientations in Fig. 8(b) and the occurrence of substructured crystal structure in Fig. 8(c). Crack propagation seemed to avoid the grain boundaries (GBs) and twinning boundaries (TBs) for the higher dislocation resistance and presented a zig-zag growth mode. In the PSL drilled hole, the crack propagated similarly to the MSL one except for the initial stage. The accumulation of local misorientations at the MSL hole root does not appear in the PSL hole. The increase of dislocation densities and its induced deformed grains only occurred along the propagated crack. The behavior of cracks avoiding GBs and TBs can be more clearly observed in the PSL drilled hole depicted in 8(d). Fig. 9 illustrates the EBSD characterizing results of the in-situ tested specimen surface at higher fatigue loads with the MSL hole delineated in Figs. 9(a)–(c) and the PSL drilled hole depicted in Figs. 9(d)– (f). Upon the higher fatigue loads, the MSL and PSL drilled holes reveal similar deformation characteristics. A higher fatigue load means

[PAGE 6] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 311 (2023) 117821 6 T. Zhang et al. Fig. 5. Crack initiation of in-situ fatigue tests with increasing fatigue cycles upon lower loads. (a–d) The MSL drilled laser hole under 𝑆max = 786 MPa. (e–h) The PSL drilled laser hole under 𝑆max = 778 MPa. Fig. 6. Crack initiation of in-situ fatigue tests with increasing fatigue cycles upon higher loads. (a–c) The MSL hole upon 𝑆max = 1021 MPa. (d–f) The PSL drilled hole upon 𝑆max = 913 MPa. Fig. 7. Comparisons of the fatigue life of laser drilled boles fabricated by millisecond-laser (MSL) and picosecond-laser (PSL), respectively. more plastic deformations at the hole root, especially considering the stress concentrations. Hence, before the crack initiation, the cyclic accumulation of plastic strains would result in dislocation stacking and lattice distortion. Hence, the deformed grain shows varying crystal orientations inside the grain, which is induced by strain gradients and indicates the existence of subgrains. The crystals along the slip bands are fragmentized. Correspondingly, the LMs in the deformed grains ex- perienced a significant increase. The recrystallized grain maps Figs. 9(c) and (f) reveal that almost all of the grains surrounding the hole root are deformed. The low-cycle fatigue damage process in laser-drilled holes is dominated by cyclic accumulations of plastic deformations, where the recast layer has little effect on the fatigue life. Moreover, detailed fractography analyses were performed to further identify the fatigue failure mechanisms of laser-drilled holes, especially the crack initiation differences induced by RZ. The fatigue fracture surfaces of the MSL and PSL drilled holes are illustrated in Figs. 10(a) and (b), respectively. The crack initiated from the middle symmetric plane of the fatigue sample, i.e. the plane strain state. In the MSL hole, the crack initiated from RZ and revealed Mode I characteristics. Subsequently, the crack propagated along the crystallographic planes in BM at the initial stage, i.e. intergranular failure, which is followed by transgranular fatigue striations. Nevertheless, the PSL drilled hole only showed crack crystallographic initiation and propagation characteris- tics at the hole root and also revealed transgranular fatigue striations in the stable propagation stage. The microstructural heterogeneity in RZ makes it lose the resistance against crystallographic deformations, leading to Mode I crack initiation.