[PAGE 1] molecules Article Development of Cycloaliphatic Epoxy-POSS Nanocomposite Matrices with Enhanced Resistance to Atomic Oxygen Mayra Y. Rivera Lopez 1, Javier Martin Lambas 1,†, Jonathan P. Stacey 1 , Sachithya Gamage 1, Agnieszka Suliga 2,‡, Andrew Viquerat 2, Fabrizio Scarpa 1 and Ian Hamerton 1,* 1 Bristol Composites Institute (ACCIS), Department of Aerospace Engineering, School of Civil, Aerospace, and Mechanical Engineering, Queen’s Building, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TR, UK; mayra.riveralopez@bristol.ac.uk (M.Y.R.L.); jm14106@bristol.ac.uk (J.M.L.); jonathan.stacey@bristol.ac.uk (J.P.S.); sachgamage96@gmail.com (S.G.); f.scarpa@bristol.ac.uk (F.S.) 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering Sciences, Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK; agnieszka.suliga@esa.int (A.S.); a.viquerat@surrey.ac.uk (A.V.) * Correspondence: ian.hamerton@bristol.ac.uk † Present address: National Composites Centre, Feynman Way Central, Bristol and Bath Science Park, Emersons Green, Bristol BS16 7FS, UK. ‡ Present address: European Space and Technology Research Centre, European Space Agency, 2201 AZ Noordwijk, The Netherlands. Received: 12 February 2020; Accepted: 22 March 2020; Published: 25 March 2020   Abstract: The preparation of ultra-thin CFRP laminates, which incorporate a cycloaliphatic epoxy resin reinforced with polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) reagent nanoﬁller, using out-of-autoclave procedure is reported. The inﬂuence of the amount of POSS within the laminate on the mechanical properties and surface roughness of the laminates is analysed before and after exposure to atomic oxygen (AO) to simulate the eﬀects of low Earth orbit (LEO). The addition of 5 wt% POSS to the base epoxy leads to an increase in both ﬂexural strength and modulus, but these values begin to fall as the POSS content rises, possibly due to issues with agglomeration. The addition of POSS oﬀers improved resistance against AO degradation with the laminates containing 20 wt% POSS demonstrating the lowest erosion yield (1.67 × 10−24 cm2/atom) after the equivalent of a period of 12 months in a simulated LEO environment. Exposure to AO promotes the formation of a silicon-rich coating layer on the surface of the laminate, which in turn reduces roughness and increases stiﬀness, as evidenced by measurements of ﬂexural properties and spectral data after exposure. Keywords: atomic oxygen; cycloaliphatic epoxy resins; nanocomposites; POSS; space composites; thermoset polymers; ultra-thin laminates 1. Introduction The adoption of carbon ﬁbre reinforced plastics (CFRP) is increasingly widespread in diﬀerent engineering sectors such as aerospace, wind turbines, construction, and automotive, due to the high strength-to-mass ratio that they oﬀer [1]. Consequently, CFRP materials oﬀer very promising behaviour compared to metals, as they can achieve higher speciﬁc stiﬀness coupled with high thermal stability [2]. The ongoing drive for the exploration and economic exploitation of space has led to a growing interest for the development of novel lightweight materials which are aﬀordable to launch and may withstand the extreme conditions present in the space environment. Owing to their remarkable speciﬁc mechanical properties and their ﬂexibility to handle multi-functional requirements, CFRP materials have become increasingly popular over the past years for use in spacecraft structures [3]. Molecules 2020, 25, 1483; doi:10.3390/molecules25071483 www.mdpi.com/journal/molecules

[PAGE 2] Molecules 2020, 25, 1483 2 of 22 As a result, these materials have been considered for past, present, and future missions, such as on the Space Telescope design, cryogenic tanks, advanced communications systems, Space Tug, Space Station, and lightweight satellites [4]. Owing to their multi-functionality, deployable structures have become more eﬀective in the application of booms, antennas, parabolic reﬂectors, mirrors, solar sails, masts, and deployable solar arrays [5]. Examples of these applications are included as Supplementary Information (SI), Figure S1. These methods oﬀer the option to minimize their volume and be compacted for storage prior to launching, then they achieve full deployment after being set to a speciﬁc position or altitude [6–9]. A signiﬁcant mass decrement with the same stiﬀness level, as well as ﬂexibility, are essential properties for the materials used in these applications, and for these reasons ultra-thin CFRP laminates are increasingly used. Additionally, the lower coeﬃcient of thermal expansion (CTE) displayed by CFRP when exposed to solar radiation, compared with metal alloys, reduces the strain observed leading to lower residual stresses, thus mitigating undesirable eﬀects seen during deployment [6]. Once deployed, CFRP structures are capable of absorbing energy through buckling, interlaminar failure, debonding between the ﬁbre-matrix conﬁguration, matrix deformation, or by the presence of cracks, ﬁbre pull-out, friction, and ﬁbre breakage [1]. However, a signiﬁcant concern for composites design is the cost of the manufacturing process, the sourcing of raw materials, and the labour cost associated with the layup. Current costs of production for CFRP-based materials for aerospace applications are typically in the range of £6.38/kg, some twenty times higher than the cost of steel (£0.30/kg) or four times higher than the cost of aluminium (£1.36/kg) [1]. Furthermore, after manufacture, the launch cost to deploy a satellite structure into Low Earth Orbit (LEO) is around £15,650/kg [10]. It may be diﬃcult to eﬀect signiﬁcant reductions in the initial cost of investment using current manufacturing methods (e.g., automated ﬁbre layup and autoclave curing) without a paradigm shift in manufacturing technology, but increasing the longevity of the CFRP structures (and thus the lifespan of missions) is key to making the process more economical. These environmental conditions during operation can lead to the deterioration of the material properties and the accelerated degradation of spacecraft structures as they consist of photochemical damage arising from vacuum ultra-violet (VUV) radiation, thermal cycling, high velocity micrometeoroid impact, damage produced by space debris [11], and most importantly for space applications, exposure to atomic oxygen [12]. Atomic oxygen (AO) is typically found in LEO at 160 to 2000 km, the most populated altitude range above the Earth. AO is formed due to the photodissociation of diatomic oxygen molecules from the Earth’s residual atmosphere into high energy radicals by the action of UV radiation from the Sun. AO is the predominant cause of erosion in satellite structures in LEO [13] and polymeric materials are particularly susceptible to degradation when exposed to it. AO is an extremely strong oxidizing agent (possessing suﬃcient energy to break covalent bonds on exposed polymer surfaces) and leads to the formation of volatile oxidation products which results in the erosion of the exposed material [14]. As a consequence, it may pose serious thermal, structural, and optical complications to vulnerable materials on the exterior of spacecraft. A common approach, which has been utilised in the past to protect the surface of polymeric space structures from the eﬀects of incidental AO is to employ protective metallic foil or metallised polymer coatings, but this introduces more weight and an additional manufacturing step into the process. More recently, the integration of inorganic silicon in the form of commercial coatings has been used: this inorganic layer has a remarkably high bond strength and oxophilicity, hence shielding the polymeric material that it covers [15]. Nevertheless, silica is an extremely brittle material and surface defects, such as scratches and cracks in the protective coating caused by problems such as the impact from micrometeroids, the deployment process, and thermal cycling, may lead to the formation of cavities that expose the underlying virgin material to the hazardous space environment [3]. This can be extremely damaging as AO radicals may undercut the silica layer and become trapped between the protective coating and the polymeric surface, leading to a rapid localised oxidation of the enclosed organic material [16].

[PAGE 3] Molecules 2020, 25, 1483 3 of 22 The use of polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) reagents is increasingly considered as a substitute to silicon-based protective coatings. POSS molecules are cage-like structures with a RSiO1:5 empirical formula, where R may be a hydrogen atom, an organic residue, or a functional group, and which have a nanoscopic diameter of approximately 1–3 nm [17]. These nanostructures consist of an inorganic silica core which may attach to a range of diﬀerent functional organic groups to act as a reinforcing ﬁller in polymeric matrix materials, resulting in a hybrid organic–inorganic character. POSS molecules are classiﬁed according to the number of reactive organic groups attached to their core cage ranging from monofunctional POSS incorporating one reactive group (and forming pendants on polymer chains) to octafunctional POSS with eight reactive groups [18]. The POSS species form a silica-rich layer similar to the silicon protective coatings upon exposure to AO. Nevertheless, when the protective layer fails and exposes the underlying material to the AO environment, the POSS nanoparticles, that are dispersed and bound to the polymeric matrix, react with the incidental AO, thus reforming the layer of passivating silica [3]. POSS-reinforced polymeric materials therefore exhibit self-healing capabilities and are able to overcome the main complication associated with other silicon-based alternatives. Additionally, numerous research studies [19–21] have demonstrated that the incorporation of POSS cages within polymeric matrices on a molecular level can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in the material properties of these polymers, including increases in glass transition temperature (Tg), reduction in moisture absorption, and mechanical response. In this work, an octafunctional POSS reagent (EP0409 glycidyl POSS) was selected with glycidyl ether (epoxy) groups at the apices. A diagram of the structural formula of glycidyl POSS is shown in Table 1. CFRP structures often incorporate aerospace-qualiﬁed epoxy resins for spacecraft structures due to their high Tg values and high thermal stability (e.g., in this work, MTM44-1, which we have selected as a benchmark, contains tetraglycidyldiaminodiphenylmethane (TGDDM) cured with 4,4′-methylenebis(2,6-diethylaniline) and 4,4′-methylenebis(2-isopropyl-6-methylaniline)). Nevertheless, these materials with a high aromatic content are extremely susceptible to degradation when exposed to VUV radiation in the LEO environment. In contrast, the chemical structure of cycloaliphatic epoxy resins incorporates fully saturated carbocyclic rings which oﬀer exceptional ultraviolet blocking eﬀects for VUV stability. While cycloaliphatic epoxies do exist for use in space applications (notably those based on 3,4-epoxycyclohexylmethyl-3′,4′-epoxycyclohexane carboxylate, ECC), these are more expensive than the more commonly used diglycidylether- or tetraglycidylamine-based monomers. The ECC monomer is a low viscosity material (400 mPas at 25 ◦C) but is very brittle when cured, thus requiring toughening for engineering use. The cycloaliphatic epoxy resin system featured in this work has previously been studied by Suliga [22] and is reported by Suliga et al. [23], but the measurements undertaken were predominantly physical, rather than mechanical, in nature. In the present work, we have produced ultra-thin ﬂat laminates comprising the same cycloaliphatic epoxy resin system, reinforced with a wider range of POSS loadings, in order to report more detailed mechanical properties and assess the AO stability. 2. Experimental Methods 2.1. Materials The CY184 epoxy resin (EEW 144–172 g/eq) and Aradur 2954 cycloaliphatic amine curing agent were purchased from Huntsman Advanced Materials (Basel, Switzerland); the EP0409 glycidyl POSS was purchased from Hybrid Plastics (Hattiesburg, MS, USA), and the MTM441 was supplied as prepreg by Solvay Group (Wilton, UK). All samples were used as received without further puriﬁcation. Moreover, for the development of the ultra-Sthin laminates, a carbon ﬁbre braid provided by A&P Technology Inc. (Cincinnati, OH, USA) was used, as well as unidirectional carbon ﬁbre in tape presentation provided by Oxeon (Borås, Sweden) (Table 1). KaptonTM H manufactured by Dupont was used as a commercial baseline comparison with the laminates.

[PAGE 4] Molecules 2020, 25, 1483 4 of 22 Table 1. The structures of the chemicals used in this work. Element Trade Name Structure 1 CY 184 2 Aradur 2954 3 EP0409 glycidyl POSS 4 MTM44-1 2.2. Layup Conﬁguration of the Thin Films Both laminates were laid up in a similar fashion, using identical ﬁbre orientations/ply distribution, but with the important distinction that while the MTM44-1 was supplied as a prepreg and could be laid up directly, the cycloaliphatic epoxy system was formed from liquid components and required pre-polymerisation to achieve a low molecular weight, free-standing, integral ﬁlm. 2.2.1. Layup Procedure for Ultra-Thin Laminates Containing MTM44-1 The method applied to develop ultra-thin laminates was based on the use of a thin metallic plate used to wrap a carbon ﬁbre braid sleeve around to achieve samples of approximate dimensions 80 mm × 100 mm. The carbon ﬁbre braid sleeve was covered by a sheet of resin prepreg and cut into two separate layers so that each layer had a MTM44-1 prepreg sheet on only one side. Several tapes of unidirectional (UD) ﬁbres equal to the same area as that of the carbon ﬁbre braid were attached next to each other. Both sides of this UD layer were stacked with two prepreg resin sheets (Figure 1, left).

[PAGE 5] Molecules 2020, 25, 1483 5 of 22 Figure 1. Schematic layup conﬁguration for ultra-thin laminates with MTM44-1 prepreg (left) and with polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS)-integrated CY184 epoxy resin (right). All the layers were stacked carefully by peeling the backing paper of the prepreg sheets and placing them in the correct order with the braid ﬁbres being placed perpendicular to the UD ﬁbres. 2.2.2. Layup procedure for ultra-thin laminates containing cycloaliphatic epoxy The constituents of the resin system (CY 184 (1), Aradur 2954 (2), EP0409 Glycidyl POSS (3)) were mixed to form a liquid resin (see Table 2 for compositions of samples studied). Table 2. The compositions of the chemical blends used in this work. Sample Composition (grammes) of Components CY184 (1) Aradur 2954 (2) POSS (3) KaptonTM H (ﬁlm) MTM44-1 15025030 1.5 1.5 0 14824835 1.44 1.44 0.12 145245310 1.35 1.35 0.3 140240320 1.2 1.2 0.6 Samples with diﬀerent POSS contents (0, 5, 10, 15, and 20 wt%) were considered in this study and the convention (1x2y3z) is used where the subscripts denote the content of each component. Initial attempts were made to achieve a ﬁlm based on a prepreg system similar to MTM44-1 but, owing to the ﬂuidity of the system, it was proposed to use MTM44-1 to set the internal layup conﬁguration and apply the designed resin system only to the two external layers, as these will be directly in contact with a LEO radiation environment. Therefore, a similar layup conﬁguration was followed as displayed in Figure 1 (right). After, the composite was manufactured, it was left at room temperature to ensure a pre-curing process and, consequently, a partial polymerisation. This process allowed the creation of a stable layup structure where the liquid resin system could be spread using the doctor blade without deforming the carbon ﬁbre braids, leading to a composite conﬁguration as displayed in Figure 1 (right) [22]. 2.3. Curing Procedure for the Ultra-Thin Laminates The baseline MTM44-1 resin system was processed using an out-of-autoclave (OOA) moulding procedure by curing the samples inside an oven with a low-pressure vacuum bag [24]. Being able to manufacture the laminates using this process is an extremely attractive prospect, due to the growing demand for OOA composite manufacturing processes, as they oﬀer a more environmentally sustainable alternative, cost savings, and shorter production times relative to the classic autoclave-based processes [25]. Processing the samples using solely an oven vacuum bag as opposed to using an autoclave may, however, negatively aﬀect ﬁbre volume fraction and void content [26], but as all the samples were manufactured following the same procedure, this process would still allow for the eﬀects of increasing the POSS concentration on laminate samples of similar characteristics to be analysed. The samples were prepared for the oven cure process following the MTM44-1 bagging guidelines [27] with an additional solid release ﬁlm layer wrapping each sample to prevent any uncontrolled liquid resin from damaging the release tool used (Figure 2). The layup was placed within a vacuum bag with

[PAGE 6] Molecules 2020, 25, 1483 6 of 22 a pressure of 27.5" Hg (The maximum vacuum, which could be achieved after completing the bagging process, was 27.5” Hg, although the MTM44-1 data sheet states that the ideal minimum value is equal to 29” Hg.) which was maintained throughout the oven cure process by means of a vacuum pump. The samples were cured inside an oven for two hours at 130 ◦C followed by an additional two hours at 180 ◦C (The ﬁrst step cure temperature for the CY 184 resin involves a 90 ◦C dwell step, while a dwell of 130 ◦C is recommended for the MTM44-1 pre-peg. Consequently, as both samples were processed together, to maintain a consistent thermal history, the slightly higher dwell temperature was used. As a consequence, gelation might have occurred within sections of the resin system, thus impeding the resin from ﬂowing as easily for a uniform distribution along the laminates.) with temperature increment ramps of +2 ◦C/min. Once the cure cycle had been completed, the tool was allowed to cool to 40 ◦C prior to retrieving the samples. Figure 2. Schematic showing out-of-autoclave (OOA) tooling for ultra-thin laminates. 2.4. Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments were performed using a TA DSC Q2000. Hermetically sealed Tzero aluminium pans were used, with sample masses of 9.1 ± 0.2 mg. Samples were equilibrated at 30 ◦C and then heated to 300 ◦C at a heating rate of 10 ◦C/min, unless otherwise stated, with the sample cell kept under a constant nitrogen ﬂow of 50 cm3/min. The glass transition temperatures were determined by calculating the midpoint of the curve inﬂexion during cooling and rescan experiments. 2.5. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectroscopy Surface spectroscopy was measured using Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy in the Attenuated Total Reﬂectance (ATR) mode on a Perkin Elmer Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer. A total of 15 scans were performed per sample over a spectral range of 650–4000 cm−1 at room temperature and co-added to produce the ﬁnal spectrum. 2.6. Measurements of Surface Roughness and Morphology Surface topography of the cured polymer and laminate samples was characterised using an Alicona Inﬁnite Focus instrument and Automation Manager surface analysis and imaging software. Surface roughness distribution data and 3D images of the sample surfaces were obtained for scanned areas of 2 mm × 2 mm using a 5× objective. The average surface roughness was calculated from a minimum of 1640 measurement points. 2.7. Atomic Oxygen Exposure The AO exposure test was carried out using a JLS Designs Plasmatherm 550–570, radio frequency plasma generator (located in the Department of Physics, University of Bristol). Four samples from each