[PAGE 1] Vol.:(0123456789) CEAS Space Journal (2026) 18:541–558 https://doi.org/10.1007/s12567-025-00628-5 ORIGINAL PAPER Inelastic scattering dynamics of hyperthermal O atoms on engineering surfaces relevant to satellites in low Earth orbit Chenbiao Xu1 · Adriana Caracciolo1 · Pedro D. C. Jorge1 · Irina Gouzman2 · Marcin D. Pilinski3 · Timothy K. Minton1 Received: 28 February 2025 / Revised: 5 April 2025 / Accepted: 12 May 2025 / Published online: 27 June 2025 © The Author(s) 2025 Abstract Understanding the gas-surface momentum transfer of oxygen atoms, a major component of the residual atmosphere at very low Earth orbit (VLEO) altitudes of 100–450 km, on materials on the exterior of satellites is important for estimating drag. We have thus investigated the scattering dynamics of orbital-velocity O atoms on four representative materials fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) polymer, aluminum with a chromate conversion Alodine coating (Al), solar cell cover glass with a ­MgF2 coating (CG), and a glass-reinforced epoxy laminate circuit board material (FR4). A pulsed hyperthermal atomic- oxygen beam with a nominal translational energy of ~ 4.7 eV was directed at the target surface, and the scattered products were detected with a rotatable mass spectrometer. Time-of-flight (TOF) distributions were measured with various incident beam angles (θi = 60°, 45°, 30°, 15°, 0°) for O atoms scattered in and out of the plane defined by the incident beam and surface normal. For both in-plane and out-of-plane scattering experiments, TOF distributions of O atoms exhibited mostly impulsive scattering, with atom-surface scattering events occurring on a time scale too short for thermal equilibrium to be achieved. A small fraction of thermally desorbed O atoms was also observed. In addition, both the flux and energy of the scattered O atoms were found to be higher when exiting the CG and FEP surfaces than when exiting the FR4 and Al sur- faces. The lower flux of O atoms scattering from FR4 and Al at a given final angle (θf), is the result of the combined effects of reactive collisions leading to OH and ­H2O products and the multiple-bounce trajectories of the incident O atoms on the rough surfaces, which leads to scattering angle randomization. Characterization of the material surfaces was consistent with the observed scattering dynamics: CG and FEP surfaces are relatively smooth at the nanometer scale, while FR4 and Al surfaces are comparatively rough. Regardless of surface roughness, the average fractional energy transfer to the surface is well parameterized by the angle through which the incident O atoms were deflected as they scattered from the surface. The fraction of thermally desorbed O atoms tends to be higher for the FR4 and Al surfaces than for the CG and FEP surfaces, which is consistent with greater energy accommodation on the FR4 and Al surfaces. The results suggest that FR4 and Al surfaces will lead to increased drag compared to CG and FEP surfaces, as a result of the greater overall energy accommoda- tion of incident O atoms on the rougher surfaces. Keywords Atomic oxygen · Scattering dynamics · Molecular beam · Satellite drag 1 Introduction Satellites play a central role in various fields such as com- munications, remote sensing and Earth observation, naviga- tion and positioning, and weather forecasting [1]. Satellite materials must withstand the challenging conditions present in low Earth orbit (LEO), including atomic oxygen (AO), temperature variations, electromagnetic radiation, outgas- sing, and micrometeoroids and orbital debris. These factors can significantly alter the morphology of satellite materi- als and damage their surfaces through oxidation, ablation, * Timothy K. Minton tminton@colorado.edu Chenbiao Xu chenbiao.xu@colorado.edu Irina Gouzman irina@soreq.gov.il 1 Ann and H.J. Smead Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303, USA 2 Space Environment Department, Soreq NRC, 81800 Yavne, Israel 3 Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80303, USA

[PAGE 2] 542 C. Xu et al. cracking, pitting, and contamination. Additionally, depend- ing on altitude, the density of the atmosphere at LEO alti- tudes may cause non-negligible drag through momentum exchange between atmospheric atoms and molecules and satellite surfaces, leading to a reduction in orbital energy. Therefore, drag estimation is crucial for orbital path deter- mination and collision avoidance analysis [2, 3], as well as lifetime prediction. Furthermore, there is a growing interest in the utilization of very low Earth orbit (VLEO, 100–450 km in altitude). Operating satellites at lower altitudes in VLEO offers sev- eral benefits, including enhanced image resolution, improved data transfer rates, and cost reduction in satellite develop- ment and launching [4, 5]. Recent missions, such as GOCE, SLATS, and SOAR, have specifically focused on studying and operating satellites at progressively lower altitudes within the VLEO region, and these missions have helped to prepare the way for future VLEO satellites that could take advantage of the benefits of VLEO operation [6–9]. How- ever, VLEO altitudes present more challenging conditions compared to higher LEO altitudes. The denser atmosphere in the VLEO region requires the use of materials that can resist the especially corrosive effects of a high flux of AO. In addition, the higher atmospheric density requires the use of a propulsion system to maintain orbit, resulting in increased mass and design complexity. Consequently, accurate drag prediction in VLEO plays an essential role in planning and operating in this challenging region of space. Drag predic- tion is not only important for orbit determination but also for managing and reducing aerodynamic drag through the identification of low-drag (and AO-resistant) materials that can extend the operational lifetime of VLEO satellites by minimizing propellant consumption [10]. Satellite drag coefficients have been modeled using different degrees of simplification in the description of gas-surface scat- tering. It has been argued that, for altitudes below 300 km, sur- faces are completely covered with adsorbates, which promote high energy accommodation of incident molecules and diffuse scattering nearly independently of the surface material [11, 12]. Therefore, a model that assumes diffuse scattering with incomplete accommodation has been used to estimate satellite drag coefficients [13]. Moreover, the degree of accommoda- tion of incident gas atoms or molecules with surfaces has been assumed to depend on surface coverage, which can be esti- mated using analytical models that depend on oxygen partial pressure [14]. More recently, the previous gas-surface interac- tion models have been compared with the Cercignani-Lampis- Lord scattering kernel, and significant differences were found in the computed drag coefficients and on the atmospheric properties derived from it, especially above 500 km [3, 15]. On the other hand, recent molecular beam-surface scattering experiments have shown non-diffuse (quasi-specular) scat- tering, with relatively low energy accommodation, for high incident angles even when the surface was covered with atomic oxygen [16]. Ultimately, modeling of gas-surface scattering dynamics is an important source of uncertainty in the computation of LEO and VLEO satellite drag coefficients [2]. For a particular gas system (defined by gas species and flow velocity), the scatter- ing dynamics are not only controlled by measurable surface parameters like RMS roughness or the atomic arrangement of the surface, but they also depend on the interaction poten- tial between the surface and the impinging energetic atom or molecule. Atoms can scatter predominantly in the forward, roughly specular, direction from surfaces that are rough on an atomic scale [17], while a highly ordered surface can promote scattering consistent with a corrugated gas-surface interaction potential [16, 18]. The scattering dynamics of O atoms on satellite materials in conditions relevant to LEO/VLEO envi- ronments are important for drag reduction, yet they remain poorly understood. We have thus used a molecular beam-surface scattering technique to characterize the scattering dynamics of O atoms on representative satellite materials. The experiments pro- vide translational energy and angular flux distributions of O atoms that scatter from the surface at different final polar and azimuthal angles (θf and ϕf, respectively) for several incident angles (θi), where the polar angles are referenced to the surface normal and the azimuthal angle is referenced to the plane con- taining the incident beam and surface normal. The scattering dynamics are therefore characterized in detail, which is crucial for drag prediction. The sample materials were selected based on two criteria. First, the materials should be commonly used on satellites and have exposure to the external environment. Second, the samples should exhibit degrees of roughness that span several orders of magnitude. The four samples chosen were: (1) fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP), a copolymer of hexafluoropropylene and tetrafluoroethylene, used for thermal control; (2) ­MgF2-coated solar cell cover glass (CG), used on rigid solar cells; (3) glass-reinforced epoxy laminate circuit board material (FR4), used for electronics; (4) aluminum with an Alodine chromate conversion coating (Al), used as a struc- tural material. This set of samples with disparate surfaces pro- vides an opportunity to investigate O-atom scattering dynam- ics on practical engineering surfaces and gain insight into the factors that control energy transfer and scattering direction in energetic atom-surface collisions. Understanding these factors is necessary for the development of high-fidelity gas-surface models used for satellite design and drag estimation.

[PAGE 3] 543 Inelastic scattering dynamics of hyperthermal O atoms on engineering surfaces relevant to… 2 Experimental methods 2.1 Molecular beam‑surface scattering apparatus The experiments were performed with a crossed molecu- lar beams apparatus with a rotatable mass spectrometer detector that was reconfigured for molecular beam-surface scattering experiments, as described in detail in previous publications [17, 19–21]. A hyperthermal pulsed O-atom beam with a 2 Hz repetition rate was generated using a laser-induced breakdown source [22]. A home-built piezo- electric valve injects a burst of pure molecular oxygen ­(O2, 99.99%), at a pressure of 38 bar, through a 1 mm dia. orifice into the 1 mm dia. throat of a conical nozzle. A ­CO2 TEA laser with a pulse energy of 7 J is focused into the ­O2 gas in the nozzle throat using a gold mirror with a 1 m radius of curvature, which induces a gas breakdown and the creation of a hot plasma. The ensuing blast wave dissociates and accelerates the gas. The expansion is com- plete before most gas particles can recombine, resulting in a beam with a nominal velocity of ~ 8 km ­s−1, consisting of ground-state oxygen atoms, O(3P), with a small component (~ 10%) of ground-state ­O2(3Σ− g ) [21, 23] and a negligible ionic component ( ≪1% ) [17]. The O/O2 hyperthermal beam was collimated through a 2 mm dia. skimmer placed 93 cm after the nozzle cone apex. A 1.3 mm wide × 2.8 mm high aperture was placed 3.5 cm downstream from the skimmer to collimate the beam further. A synchronized chopper wheel (17.8 cm dia.) with three equally spaced 1.5 mm wide slots and a rotation speed of 300 Hz was used to select a narrow range of beam velocities from the beam pulse. The chop- per wheel blocked the light emitted by the plasma as well as the residual ions, which have velocities higher than the O and ­O2 in the hyperthermal beam. Figure 1 shows the translational energy distributions, P(ET), of O and ­O2 in the hyperthermal beam after veloc- ity selection by the chopper wheel, as well as the mole fractions of these two components of the beam. To obtain the translational energy distributions, the beam was directed into the mass spectrometer equipped with an electron-impact ionizer, a quadrupole mass filter, and a continuous dynode electron multiplier, where the electron multiplier was operated in pulse counting mode. Num- ber density distributions, N(t), of the incident beam pulse were obtained as a function of the flight time over the known distance from the nozzle throat to the electron- impact ionizer (132.9 cm). These N(t) distributions, also referred to as time-of-flight (TOF) distributions were used to derive velocity and translational energy distributions of the O atoms and ­O2 molecules that passed through the ionizer, under the assumption that the beam originated from a point source at the nozzle throat. After correct- ing for the relative ionization cross sections of O and ­O2 (1:1.9) [21], the beam was found to consist of 95% O atoms and 5% ­O2 molecules. The average translational energy of the O atoms was 〈Ei〉 = 451.9 kJ ­mol−1, with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 63 kJ ­mol−1. The average translational energy of the ­O2 molecules was 〈Ei〉 = 903.8 kJ ­mol−1, with a FWHM = 132 kJ ­mol−1. TOF distributions of scattered products were collected with the rotatable mass spectrometer detector following impingement of the incident hyperthermal beam pulse on the target surface. To obtain a given TOF distribution, the relative number density of the scattered products having a selected mass-to-charge ratio, m/z, was measured as a func- tion of the flight time from the surface to the electron-impact ionizer of the mass spectrometer, a distance of 34.4 cm, and collection of a given TOF distribution typically involved the accumulation of these N(t) distributions for several hundred pulses of the incident beam. The TOF distributions were acquired with various sets of incident (θi) and final (θf, ϕf) angles, where the polar angles (θi, θf) are referenced to the surface normal and the azimuthal angle (ϕf) is referenced to the plane defined by the incident beam direction and the surface normal. A corresponding translational energy distri- bution was derived from each TOF distribution, from which average energy and total relative flux were obtained. 2.2 Samples The samples used in this work were procured from commer- cial manufacturers and were intended to be representative of satellite materials currently in use. Fig. 1 Translational energy distributions of the O and ­O2 components of the hyperthermal beam. The red and the blue curves represent the O and ­O2 distributions after velocity selection by a chopper wheel. The areas of the translation energy distributions of O and ­O2 are pro- portional to their mole fractions in the hyperthermal beam

[PAGE 4] 544 C. Xu et al. 2.2.1 Solar cell cover glass (CG) Cover glass material is used as a top layer on rigid solar cells, where the CG transparency allows sunlight to reach the semiconductor underneath while also providing ther- mal insulation and filtering of ultraviolet (UV), infrared (IR), electron, and proton radiation. The CG sample was produced by Qioptic, labeled as “CMG 150 A/R Coated Coverglass,” and is a cerium-doped borosilicate glass with a ­MgF2 coating. 2.2.2 Fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) FEP is a clear material that is a copolymer of hexafluoro- propylene and tetrafluoroethylene. This material was chosen because it is commonly used on the external surfaces of satellites for thermal control [24, 25], and it is also relatively AO-resistant [26]. The sample surface was the uncoated top layer of a space-grade FEP film tape. The FEP film had a silver coating and pressure-sensitive adhesive on the back side (a Sheldahl product purchased from Bron Aerotech). 2.2.3 Composite printed circuit board (FR4) This material was selected because it is commonly used in satellite electronics. PCBs are characterized by copper circuits printed on a fiber glass core. The sample chosen is referred to as flame retardant, FR4, and it has an epoxy and carbon-based outer layer (solder mask). Although FR4 generally does not exceed 30% of the satellite surface, it was observed that the color of the solder mask (green, in the case of FR4) can alter the average temperature of the overall sat- ellite. Green and black solder masks were found to increase the satellite body average temperature by 16 K compared to white PCBs [27]. The sample was extracted from a commer- cial printed circuit board by cutting a piece that excluded the copper components; thus, the relevant surface was the solder mask layered on the top of the composite glass-reinforced epoxy laminate material. 2.2.4 Aluminum with an Alodine chromate conversion coating (Al) This material was selected because of its use for satellite structural components and communication systems. Alu- minum is advantageous due to its light weight and high mechanical resistance. To enhance the material’s chemical resistance, aluminum is chemically converted with chromate to create a protective coating on the outer layer of the metal- lic surface that may be exposed to AO [28, 29]. The Alodine- treated aluminum sample was provided by Montana State University’s Space Science and Engineering Laboratory and it was part of a ready-to-fly antenna bracket. 2.3 Surface characterization Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and X-ray photoelectron spec- troscopy (XPS) were used to analyze sample surfaces before and after scattering experiments. SEM measure- ments were carried out using a Zeiss SUPRA 55VP Field Emission SEM (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany) instrument in a high-vacuum mode. The samples were analyzed using a low-voltage electron beam, set at 1 kV, to prevent charging of the surface. XPS measurements were performed using a PHI 5600 (PHI, USA) instrument equipped with an Al Kα monochromatic source (1486.6 eV). Sample charging was compensated with a charge neutralizer, and the position of the C 1s core level line at 285.0 eV was taken as an energy reference for all the peaks for FR4, Al, and CG. Because of the negligible carbon signal observed from the FEP surface, the F 1 s core level line at 686 eV was used as an energy reference for this material. All XPS spectra were collected with a pass energy of 46.95 eV. For quantitative analysis, PHI relative sensitivity factors (RSF) were used: F 1 s = 1, O 1 s = 0.711, C 1 s = 0.296, N 1 s = 0.477, Cr ­2p3 = 1.583, and Sn ­3d5 = 4.725. The elemental composition of the samples was also evaluated with an Oxford Instruments EDS system, attached to a SU3500 Hitachi Tungsten filament SEM with 30 keV primary electron beam energy. While XPS is sensi- tive to the top 10 nm surface layer, EDS provides elemental information on the micrometer length scale. To determine the roughness of the target surfaces, the surface morphology was probed by atomic force micros- copy (AFM) and white-light interferometry. The CG and FEP sample surfaces were examined using a NaniteAFM instrument from Nanosurf AG, Switzerland, operated with an Easyscan 2 controller and Nanosurf software. All images were obtained in tapping mode using Aspire™ conically- shaped silicon tips, model CT170R, with a resonant fre- quency of approximately 170 kHz. The surface roughness was based on at least four measurements of 5 × 5 µm2 areas. The AFM images were processed using WSxM 4.0 software. A Veeco Model Wyko NT3300 white light interferometer was used to characterize the roughness of the FR4 and Al samples. All samples were analyzed without surface prepa- ration, either as received or as they were when removed from the high vacuum scattering chamber. 2.4 Experimental procedure The samples were cleaned with isopropanol (99%) and then mounted in the high-vacuum scattering chamber (with a pressure of ~ ­10−7 Torr maintained during experiments) on the heated copper plate of a sample holder, where they were held at an elevated temperature to remove some of the physisorbed molecular contaminants, such as ­H2O. A

[PAGE 5] 545 Inelastic scattering dynamics of hyperthermal O atoms on engineering surfaces relevant to… cartridge heater was inserted into a hole in the plate, allow- ing the plate to be heated from room temperature to ~ 700 K, although temperatures of 353–373 K were typically used. Even with the use of an oil-free turbomolecular pump and a cryopump to pump the scattering chamber, the low chamber pressure of ~ ­10−7 Torr maintained during experiments, and the elevated sample temperatures, the samples may have had adsorbed hydrocarbons on their surfaces during an experi- ment, which might have come from adventitious carbon from sample handling in the laboratory or, less likely, from contamination in the chamber. The steady flux of O atoms onto the surface during an experiment (estimated to be ~ ­1014 atoms ­cm2 ­s−1) would be expected to reduce hydrocarbon contamination on surfaces, though possibly not eliminat- ing it. In addition, the bombardment of the surfaces by O atoms would be expected to result in a steady-state oxygen surface coverage, similar but probably not identical to that on leading surfaces in the LEO/VLEO environment. The surface chemistry was not characterized in situ during the experiments, so it is not possible to know the exact surface conditions during the beam-surface scattering experiments. To ensure that data acquisition was performed with the sample surfaces at a steady state, TOF distributions of ine- lastically scattered O atoms were measured at an arbitrary θf until they no longer changed. Then, TOF distributions were acquired for O and ­O2 products at m/z = 16(O+) and 32(O2 +). Data collection for a given sample typically proceeded for at least 12 h before the sample was replaced or its configu- ration was changed. The TOF distributions of scattered O atoms did not change during this time, suggesting that a steady-state was attained for each experimental run. The raw data were corrected for the ion flight time, IFT = α (m/z)1/2, where m is the detected product mass in atomic mass units, z is the ion charge, and the parameter, α, was determined empirically to be α = 2.47. In addition, the TOF distribu- tions obtained for scattered O atoms were corrected for the dissociative ionization of ­O2 to ­O+ in the electron-impact ionizer. The fraction of the TOF distribution for ­O2, detected at m/z = 32, that appeared at m/z = 16 was determined to be 11%. This percentage was then used to scale the TOF distri- butions acquired at m/z = 32, and these scaled distributions were subtracted from the corresponding TOF distributions collected at m/z = 16 to yield the net O-atom TOF distribu- tions. The TOF distributions of the O and ­O2 products were transformed into translational energy distributions, P(ET), using the relation P(ET ) ∝t2N(t). The total relative prod- uct flux was obtained from the TOF distribution for a given set of incident and final angles by integration of the P(ET) distribution. An average final energy was also derived from each P(ET) distribution. TOF distributions were collected at final angles in the plane of the incident beam and surface normal (“in-plane” scattering) with all sample surfaces, and TOF distributions were also collected at final angles that were out of the plane of the incident beam and surface normal (“out-of- plane” scattering) for the Al and FEP surfaces. The scat- tering angles are described in a spherical coordinate sys- tem (refer to Fig. 2). In the experiment, the incident beam direction was fixed, and the incident angle was adjusted by altering the surface orientation. Initially, the beam veloc- ity (v ) was aligned with the surface normal (n) such that v = vmag(0, 0, −1) and 퐧= (0, 0, 1). The surface normal was reoriented about the x-axis using a sample mount tilted by an angle 휃s and about the y-axis by an adjustable angle 휃manip . The detector is initially aligned with the rotated sur- face normal projected onto the z-x plane and has coordinates xdet = ldet (sin 휃manip, 0, cos 휃manip ) . The detector was subse- quently rotated by an angle 휃det about the y-axis (Fig. 2). Vectors subjected to rotation are denoted with a prime sym- bol, with the number of primes indicating the number of rotations. The incident polar angle is defined as the angle between the surface normal and the incident velocity vec- tor. Similarly, the final polar angle is the angle between the surface normal and the detector position vector (aligned along the detection axis). These angles may be determined Fig. 2 Schematic diagrams of the orientation of the target surface with respect to the incident beam for in-plane and out-of-plane scat- tering configurations. Rotated vectors are denoted with a prime sym- bol, with the number of primes indicating the number of rotaions

[PAGE 6] 546 C. Xu et al. by applying the rotation matrix Ry (휃det ) to xdet and by apply- ing Ry (휃manip )Rx (휃s ) to n . The incident 휃i = ∠(퐯퐧 ) and final 휃f = ∠(퐱 det퐧 ) polar angles can be determined from the following equations, For the in-plane configuration, the surface of the sample is perpendicular to the detector rotational plane (θs = 0), and θi and θf are equal to θmanip and θdet, respectively. For the out-of-plane configuration, both θi and θf depend on θs. We define the final azimuthal angle ϕf = 0, as being oriented in the plane defined by the surface normal and the incident velocity. ϕf, is, in general, non-zero and can be determined from the detector’s position within a reference frame aligned with the incident velocity and the surface normal. In this transformed reference frame, the z-axis coincides with the rotated surface normal, and the x- and y-axes are oriented such that the incident velocity vector can be expressed with two components, v′′′ = (vt, 0, vn ) . The desired reference frame is obtained through a sequence of reference frame rotations. First about y by an angle θmanip, then about x′ by an angle θs, and finally about z′′ by an angle θalign deter- mined so that v = (vt, 0, vn ). Through algebraic manipula- tion, we find tan 휃align = −sin휃s tan 휃manip . The tangent of the azi- muthal angle is given by the ratio of y and x detector coordinates in this rotated reference frame As mentioned above, a heated copper plate was used to maintain the samples at temperatures above ambient. Sam- ples mounted in the in-plane configuration were pressed by the copper plate against a stainless-steel frame, such that the detector rotation axis passed through the sample surface. For the out-of-plane experiments, the Al and FEP samples were adhered directly to heated copper plates that were cut with faces at tilt angles of θs = 20° and 45°, and the sam- ple surfaces were oriented such that the detector viewing region on the surface was coincident with region where the incident beam impacted the surface. The FEP sample was supplied with pressure-sensitive adhesive on the back side, and it was simply pressed onto the tilted copper face. The Al sample was attached by using an electrically conductive polyimide adhesive: Creative Materials Inc., 110–19, which was stored at − 85°C before usage. A primary layer of adhe- sive was applied separately to the sample surface and the copper face and cured for 30 min at 150 °C. The two pieces were attached together with a second layer of adhesive, and (1) cos 휃i = cos 휃s cos 휃manip, (2) cos 휃f = cos 휃s cos 휃det. (3) tan 휙f = −sin 휃det sin 휃align + sin 휃s cos 휃det cos 휃align sin 휃det cos 휃align + sin 휃align sin 휃s cos 휃det the whole assembly was cured for 1 h at 180° C. For both in-plane and out-of-plane experiments, the scattered O and ­O2 were detected over the full angular range accessible to the detector. TOF distributions of O and ­O2 products were accumulated for various total numbers of beam pulses with various incident angles and collected twice at each final (θdet) angle by first increasing and then decreasing the final angle in 5° increments. The two TOF distributions collected for each set of incident and final angles were added to give the total TOF distribution that was used in the data analysis. A summary of the data acquisition conditions is shown in Table 1. 3 Results 3.1 Surface characterization Low magnification (1000 ×) SEM images of the as received FR4, Al, CG, and FEP surfaces are shown in Fig. 3. The SEM images of the FR4, CG, and FEP samples show uni- form surfaces, whereas the surface of the Al sample is nonu- niform and exhibits significant defects and cracks over the whole surface. The CG and FEP surfaces are particularly smooth compared to those of FR4 and Al. SEM images of the CG surface show only traces of dust, while the FEP sur- face presents a few grooves, which are commonly generated during the fabrication process of the polymer. The chemical compositions of the as-received sample surfaces were further investigated by EDS and XPS. EDS analysis of the FR4 sample showed that C and O atoms are the main elements (55.2 and 32.1%, respectively) by sam- pling the material in depth between 1 and 3 μm (Table 2). EDS analysis on the Al sample indicated that the main ele- ments are Al (58.1%), followed by C (17.3%) and O (18.8%) in the same depth range (Table 3). XPS was used to deter- mine the elemental chemical composition in the top ~ 10 nm of all four samples. XPS data (Table 2) acquired for FR4 showed high concentrations of C and O atoms (73.5 and 18.3%, respectively), which was qualitatively similar to what was observed by EDS but suggested that the top layer of FR4 probed by XPS was enriched in hydrocarbons (possibly including adventitious carbon) compared to the underlying bulk. In contrast to the EDS result on the Al sample surface, XPS analysis of this surface showed no trace of aluminum; the surface was dominated by C and O, with minor impuri- ties of Si, Cr, Na, Mg, etc., as shown in Table 3. The pres- ence of C and O atoms could be enhanced by contamination of the sample, given that the Alodine chromate conversion treatment of aluminum is generally not performed with high-purity solutions and is likely to leave organic mate- rial (as well as the metal and nonmetal impurities) on the surface [29, 30]. XPS analysis of the as-received CG surface