[PAGE 1] Heliyon 9 (2023) e17431 Available online 5 July 2023 2405-8440/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Synergistic effects of atomic oxygen and thermal cycling in low earth orbit on polymer-matrixed space material Ruiqiong Zhai a,*, Xiaoning Yang a, Lixiang Jiang a, Hong Gao b, Yuxin Zhang c, Zilong Jiao a a Beijing Institute of Spacecraft Environment Engineering, Beijing, 100094, China b China Aerospace Components Engineering Center, Beijing, China c College of Materials Science and Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Polymer Atomic oxygen (AO) Thermal cycling (TC) Synergistic effect LEO environment A B S T R A C T Polymer-matrixed materials are widely used in the spacecrafts’ structures. However, crafts located in the LEO（Low Earth Orbit） would suffer from hazardous environment factors when orbiting in the space. It has been reported that the space environment factors’ integral effect (which represents the factual detriment in space) is not equivalent to the simple summation of each individual. Hence, atomic oxygen and thermal cycling were selected as the starting point for studying the typical LEO synergistic effects on polymer-matrixed space material. In this work, methods such as surface morphology observation, surface components analyzation and inter- laminar-shear strength test were embraced to gather the basic information for the study of degradation. As a result, focusing on the composites selected in this work, synergistic effects do exist between the two factors (AO&TC, representing for atomic oxygen and thermal cycling combined). Besides, a quantified index was proposed to represent synergistic characteristics，so as to lay the foundation for the scientific evolution of material characterization. 1. Introduction The carbon-fiber-reinforced polymers possess many advantages for Low Earth Orbit (LEO) spacecraft applications due to their superior properties, such as low mass, easy-processing, excellent thermo-optical properties and strength-to-mass ratio. However, when they are exposed into the space environment such as ultrahigh vacuum (UHV), atomic oxygen, charged particles, thermal cycling, ultraviolet radiation, orbital debris impacts [1–3], the polymers would definitely undergo severe degradation without appropriate protection [4–8]. Atomic oxygen (AO), which generates from UV-induced(E > 5.12eV, λ < 243nm) dissociation of molecular oxygen, is a constituent of a particular concern for materials in the LEO environment [9,10]. Besides, it is regarded as the most severe hazard for spacecraft’s external surfaces, due to its oxidative and erosive behavior [11–13]. It could lead to changes in optical deterioration [14] and mass loss [15] caused by cratering, internal and back-surface spallation [16], along with particulate and molecular contamination, and fur­ therly, induce the degradation in mechanical properties [17–20]. Worth to be noticed that, - in most cases, tests for effects of space environment factors could only be performed individually in the ground-based facilities; however, space materials are actually surviving in the space environment factors simultaneously in reality. It * Corresponding author. E-mail address: lingid_83@163.com (R. Zhai). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Heliyon journal homepage: www.cell.com/heliyon https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e17431 Received 9 May 2022; Received in revised form 15 June 2023; Accepted 16 June 2023

[PAGE 2] Heliyon 9 (2023) e17431 2 indicates that, the ground-based tests may not be representative for reproducing the reactions taking place in the actual space exposure. So, it raises the interests of the researches to decide whether the integral space environment effect equals to the simple summation of each. -Based on some previous works delivered in the references, some of materials tell that the answers are not that direct and simple [21–28]. According to the previous results, under the other space factors such as UV, some material reveals harsher AO erosion in structure modification and surface roughening, leading to irreversible degradation of optical, thermal, electrical and mechanical properties [10]. However, there seems to be a vacancy focusing on AO interaction accompanied with thermal cycling (TC), where researchers seldom stepped in—once, AO and thermal exposure behavior had been studied [29,30], however the effects were tested and analyzed respectively; or, more efforts are needed to enrich or verify the results and unravel the mechanisms [31]. In late publication, some ceramic coatings are evaluated by measuring the thermal expansion coefficient and AO erosion rate [32], with a phenomenological modeling introduced to approach the relationship between erosion mechanism due to AO impact and surface energy variation induced by thermal cycles; such analysis highlights the importance of considering the synergistic effects between different aging factors(such as AO and TC), so as to achieve a reliable interpretation of the space environment’s effect on spacecraft structures and materials. That is part of the reason why the work in this paper was undertaken. 2. Research strategy * CF/EP: carbon-fiber-reinforced epoxy; *CF/CE: carbon-fiber-reinforced cyanate ester * LDEF: Long Duration Exposure Facility; *STS: Space Transportation System Long-duration spacecrafts such as the ISS are generally located in the Low Earth Orbit, typically, at the altitude around 400 km. Among which, atomic oxygen (AO) and thermal cycling (TC) are the most typical space environment factors. Therefore, those two factors were selected to serve as a primary step to explore the space environment synergistic effects on the space material. Unlike in the GEO environment, it is less probable for the spacecrafts to encounter with environment such as radiation or charged particles in most cases; besides, AO itself is electroneutral–therefore，only macro-indicator such as mechanical performance, along with optical observation and mass loss, was taken into consideration at the current stage, to set as the index to characterize the synergistic effects. Given that the discussion was under the aspect of mechanical performance, two materials which are either prevalent used or with a great prospect of future usage, were selected as the test carrier for the study. The scheme of thoughts was demonstrated in Fig. 1. 3. Test method 3.1. Test materials Carbon-fiber-reinforced epoxy(CF/EP) materials has already been utilized prevalently in the astronautic engineering, meanwhile, modified carbon-fiber-reinforced cyanate(CF/CE) materials has become a new tendency in space material selection nowadays. Fig. 1. Research thoughts and structure. R. Zhai et al.

[PAGE 3] Heliyon 9 (2023) e17431 3 Thus, two types of composite materials named M40/AG-80 (carbon-fiber-reinforced epoxy) and M40/DFA-1(carbon-fiber- reinforced cyanate) are selected as the test specimen in this study. Each type of the material was divided into 5 groups labelled as ①/②/③/④/⑤ Group. 3.2. Test schedule AO was nominated to refer to Atomic Oxygen, and TC was nominated to refer to Thermal Cycling. Group① was set to be stay original，while Group② was set to undergo AO test, Group③ to undergo TC test, Group④ to undergo (AO + TC) sequent test, Group⑤ to undergo (TC + AO) sequent test. Thus, as it shows in Fig. 2, only twice AO tests under the same condition and once TC test could be enough. —which means, at the first step, Group②+Group④ would join the first AO test; after that, Group③+Group④+Group⑤ were taken into the TC test; and at the last step, Group⑤ after TC test finished its second AO test. Till then, each group would accomplish its own “Brand-Burning”(represent its corresponding space environment factors), as it listed in Table S1 in the Appendix. The test conditions are stated in section 3.3.1. 3.3. Test facilities and methods 3.3.1. Space environment test method AO test was conducted in the AO impact facility at Beijing Institute of Spacecraft Environment Engineering(BISEE), as illustrated in Fig. 3, with sample positioning presented(Kapton Km was laid in the middle, while Kapton Ke laid at the edge, so as to measure the actual AO fluence during test). The sample panel would be clamped inside the chamber, placed at the normal incidence facing towards the AO source. Of which, the primary indexes are: 1) Vacuum degree：5 × 10−2Pa 2) Area of Impact Flux：(diameter of the area) > 150cm3)Energy of the Flux：3～10eV 4) AO Flux:1.0 × 1016 atom/cm2/s 5) AO fluence：1.5 × 1020 atom/cm2 TC test was conducted in the F-10(B) cryogenic test chamber at BISEE, of which, the primary indexes are: 1) Temperature range：-150～180 ◦C; 2) Heating Rate：>30 ◦C/min; To avoid TC induced microcracks, test temperature was set to be in the range of [−150,+150]◦C with 200 cycles, referring to reference [33–35]. 3.3.2. Specimen performance test method Thermo-oxidation process is intrinsically linked with the action mechanism and behavior of polymers [36]. Hence, multiple test methods are introduced into the performance evaluation. Mass loss test was conducted on the Miro Sartorius Precision Electronic Balance, with accuracy at 10−6 g. The specimens are weighed before and after space environment test, three times of each, recorded with average value; then, AO interaction rate could be deduced following “Kapton equivalent fluence” method as an ASTM standard of measurement [37], as it listed in Table 2 and Table 3.，—following Equation (1) as below: Re = Δm/ρ fkt • A = Δm • V fkt • A • m = Δm • d fkt • m = Δm • d F • m (1) Fig. 2. Layout of the test. R. Zhai et al.

[PAGE 4] Heliyon 9 (2023) e17431 4 where, Re is the AO interaction rate of the test material，cm3/atom; F is AO fluence，atoms/cm2; ρ is the density if the specimen, g/cm3 fk is AO flux，atoms/cm2/s. A is area of exposure，cm2 t is the duration of the AO test, s Δm is the mass loss of the specimen，g; m is the mass of the specimen, g; d is the thickness of the specimen ，cm Optical morphology observation was conducted on the OLYMPUS GX-51 optical microscope at BISEE; SEM observation was conducted on the Quanta 200 type Scanning Electron Microscope. Surface chemical analysis was based on the results from VGDSCALABMKIIX-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Inter-laminar shear strength (ILSS) test was conducted follow the GB/T 30969-2014 standard, with loading speed atυ＝1.3 mm/ min. 4. Test results and analysis 4.1. Surface Optical Morphology Optical Morphology was observed before and after the space environment tests, as illustrated in Fig. 4(M40/DFA-1) and Fig. 5 (M40/AG-80). Comparing to the original specimen, Group② (which undergone AO test) has an obvious erosion on the surface, with the carbon fiber exposed(Fig. 4②); while Group③ (which undergone TC test) reveals non-significant denudation in the surface resin, but obviously darkened in color and texture; Specimen undergone (AO + TC) (TC + AO) sequent tests(Group④and Group⑤) are observed too, which reveals no notable difference. Basically, specimen suffered from AO test within, were all had their surface fiber exposed more or less. Whereas, the darkening of the resin may be caused by the recomposing of the functional group, which has different refractive index. 4.2. Surface Microtopography Analysis (by SEM) Surface Microtopography Analysis was conducted by Scanning Electron Microscope, before and after the space environment test, as illustrated in Fig. 6, Fig. 7. Common features revealed on the surfaces of both of the materials are:(1) Carpet-like surface microtopography could be identified as the remarkable changing after AO test, however, no noticeable feature that worth to be mentioned after TC test; (2) Specimen Fig. 3. Layout of the AO test. Table 1 Atomic oxygen interaction rate under AO and TC + AO test condition. Material Atomic Oxygen Reaction Rate（ × 10−24cm3/atom） AO TC + AO M40/DFA-1 2.37 2.33 M40/AG-80 4.63 3.95 R. Zhai et al.

[PAGE 5] Heliyon 9 (2023) e17431 5 Table 2 Contrast of the variation of the mass loss rate. Material d（AO） d（TC） d(AO + TC) d（TC + AO） d(AO)+d(TC) M40/DFA-1 0.33% 0.086% 0.425% 0.193% 0.416% M40/AG-80 0.41% 0.089% 0.511% 0.325% 0.499% Table 3 Contrast of the Variation of the specimen’s ILSS. Material ⊿AO ⊿TC ⊿（AO + TC） ⊿（TC + AO） ⊿AO+⊿TC M40/DFA-1 −2.63 MPa +3.11 MPa −0.91 MPa +0.38 MPa +0.48 MPa M40/AG-80 −0.90 MPa +4.54 MPa −0.06 MPa +2.36 MPa +3.64 MPa Fig. 4. Surface Optical Morphology of M40/DFA-1. Fig. 5. Surface Optical Morphology of M40/AG-80. R. Zhai et al.

[PAGE 6] Heliyon 9 (2023) e17431 6 withstood (AO + TC) sequent test demonstrated plenty of carbon fibers exposed near the surface, some of which were ruptured individually; on the other hand, specimen withstood (TC + AO) sequent test had the resin eroded carpet-like to some extent, but it was still relatively unapparent comparing to the Group suffered from (AO + TC) test. 4.3. Mechanical performance analysis 4.3.1. Mass loss rate and AO reaction rate Mass of the specimen were weighed before and after the exposure. The result present a tiny declination on all the group of material. The mass reduction is primarily due to the volatile created by the bond-breaking induced fragments. For example, an O-atom addicted to C atom on the surface followed by H atom elimination, and after that high-energy collisions could either knock weakly bound CO or CO2 off the surface directly or cause a reaction that would subsequently liberate these molecules [22]. Mass loss and AO reactive rate (those had AO test within) was calculated based on the data collected, and the mass loss was expressed in Fig. 8. AO reactive rate presented in Table 1（which is consistent with MISSE 2 In-Space data [38]in rational difference）could manifest directly, that, specimen undergone TC test could enervate the AO interaction with the material, which means, TC experience could enhance the material’s resistance to AO erosion-that is in accordance with the phenomenon observed from surface morphology. The coalescence of the voids（mass loss） means the reduction of the materials -, which would definitely reduce the sample’s capability to withstand the stress loads. When the specimens could not withstand the load anymore, they fractured. Coalescence into critical-sized voids could occur at any location along the specimen. Therefore, the observed phenomenon mentioned above should have some correlations with the mechanical strength test. 4.3.2. Inter-laminar shear strength （ILSS） Test Inter-laminar strength test was conducted before and after space environment test, as illustrated below in Fig. 9.(Detailed data was laid in Table S4 in Appendix). Some common features could be extracted from the data of ILSS for both materials that: (1) ILSS performance (which verified the prediction) declined after AO test, whereas it inclined after TC test; (2) Both AO single test and (AO + TC) sequent test weaken the materials’ ILSS, of which, the sequent test has a relatively lower amplitude; (3) Both TC single test and (TC + AO) sequent test enhanced the material’s ILSS, of which, the latter is relatively less conspicuous. 4.4. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis 4.4.1. M40/DFA-1 C1s peak spectrum from the XPS of the M40/DFA-1 materials was demonstrated in the following Fig. 10. Basically, the super­ position of components of typical functional groups in which the atom is involved, shapes the peaks—based on the acknowledgement that photoelectrons binding energy is influenced by the electron density [20]. Peak decomposition could elucidate the chemical nature of the organic compounds., The components of the C1s peak were as follows:285eV, always refers to carbon only bound to carbon and hydrogen[C-(C,H)]; 286.5eV, attributed to carbon making a single bond with oxygen or nitrogen[C-(O,N)]; 288.6 eV, assigned to carbon making a double bond with oxygen as in amide function [C-(C––O)–N]; near 289.0eV, assigned to carboxyl or ester functions [C-(C––O)–O],respectively [20]. Fig. 6. Surface Microtopography of M40/DFA-1. R. Zhai et al.