[PAGE 1] Ferroelectrics ISSN: 0015-0193 (Print) 1563-5112 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/gfer20 Experiments of drilling micro-holes on superalloy with thermal barrier coatings by using femtosecond laser Changsheng Lu, Wenqiang Duan, Kedian Wang, Rujia Wang & Zhanghan Tang To cite this article: Changsheng Lu, Wenqiang Duan, Kedian Wang, Rujia Wang & Zhanghan Tang (2020) Experiments of drilling micro-holes on superalloy with thermal barrier coatings by using femtosecond laser, Ferroelectrics, 564:1, 37-51, DOI: 10.1080/00150193.2020.1761700 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00150193.2020.1761700 Published online: 23 Aug 2020. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 540 View related articles View Crossmark data Citing articles: 13 View citing articles Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gfer20

[PAGE 2] Experiments of drilling micro-holes on superalloy with thermal barrier coatings by using femtosecond laser Changsheng Lua,b, Wenqiang Duana,b,c, Kedian Wanga,b, Rujia Wanga,b, and Zhanghan Tanga,b aState Key Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, P.R. China; bShaanxi Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robots, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, P. R. China; cSuzhou Academy, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Jiangsu, China Suzhou ABSTRACT A femtosecond laser was used to process micro-holes on the nickel- based superalloy with thermal barrier coatings. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to observe the morphology of micro- holes inlet, outlet and the side wall. The changes of morphology with laser focusing position and laser power were analyzed. The results showed that the micro-holes processed by femtosecond laser required a certain amount of focus position to optimize the process- ing quality. The entrance was not round sometimes and the micro- holes outlet was irregular with high power laser machining. A further repair of micro-hole by using low power femtosecond laser was pre- sented. Low laser power modification can improve the quality of micro-holes. ARTICLE HISTORY Received 19 August 2019 Accepted 30 January 2020 KEYWORDS Femtosecond laser; focus position; laser power; low laser power modification 1. Introduction With the development of laser technology, laser technology has attracted wide attention in the surface micro-nano texture [1–7], nanowire nanointerconnect for nanodevice fab- rication [8–24] and micro-nano manipulation [25–35]. Laser plays an important role in micromachining field. In the advanced aircraft engine, the temperature of gas flowing into the turbine has already over 1850 K and the gas pressure has reached 50 atmos- pheric pressures. In order to ensure that the turbine blade can be manipulated in high temperature and high pressure gas, not only the nickel base alloy with high temperature resistance should be selected as the material, but also advanced film cooling technology and ceramic thermal barrier coating (TBC) technology should be used to effectively improve the performance and service life of the blade. The thermal insulation effect of thermal barrier coating is directly related to film cooling technology. The researches show that when thermal barrier coating are made in the same way, the cooling effect of film hole will directly affect the thermal insulation effect of coating [36–38]. For the processing of film hole, if the film holes are machined before the deposition of thermal barrier coatings, the hole size will be reduced because of the deposition of the coating material, which will affect the cooling effect of the film hole. Therefore, it is of vital CONTACT Kedian Wang kdwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P.R. China  2020 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC FERROELECTRICS 2020, VOL. 564, 37–51 https://doi.org/10.1080/00150193.2020.1761700

[PAGE 3] importance to process high quality film holes on nickel-based superalloy with thermal barrier coatings for the development of turbofan engines. There are many machining methods for fabrication of film cooling holes, including electric discharge machining (EDM) [39, 40], electro-chemical machining (ECM) [41] and laser processing technology. However, EDM can only process conductive materials. ECM can pro- cess high quality film cooling holes; however, its processing efficiency is low and it can only process metal materials. In a word, these two traditional micro-machining techniques cannot complete the one-step machining of film holes on nickel-based superalloy with thermal bar- rier coatings. While laser processing has high machining efficiency, accuracy and wide adapt- ability to materials [42–57], thus laser processing has become the optimal machining method for film holes on nickel-based superalloy with thermal barrier coatings. However, there are some defects in the film hole machined by long pulse and short pulse lasers, including recast layer, heat affected zone and delamination cracks [58]. These defects greatly affected the ser- vice life and performance of the blade [59]. There still exists recast layer in the hole machined by picosecond laser. But for femtosecond laser, its pulse duration is much less than the ther- mal conduction time between the electron and the phonon in the material, so the thermal effect between the femtosecond laser and the material can be ignored. The micro-holes with no recast layer and micro-crack can be processed. However, there exists the problem of satur- ation of hole depth in the femtosecond laser processing [60]. The quality of hole wall is poor when processing the deep hole that is over 2 mm deep. In order to fabricate high quality film holes on nickel-based alloys with thermal barrier coatings by femtosecond laser, many scholars have studied the processing technology and processing mechanism of femtosecond laser micro-holes on macro and micro scales. On the macro scale, Nielsen et al. demonstrated that the process of femtosecond laser machin- ing deep holes is mainly divided into two stages, including the rapid formation of narrow capillary structure and the expansion of capillary structure [61]. Jiang et al. modified the two-temperature model parameters of femtosecond laser processing metal materials by using the first principle to study the interaction mechanism between femtosecond laser and materials [62]. On the microscopic scale, the study of Das et al. showed that the surface roughness can be controlled at the sub-micron scale in the process of superalloys with ther- mal barrier coating with femtosecond laser [63]. In addition, other scholars have studied the microstructure of holes machined by femtosecond laser [64–67]. Femtosecond laser can process high quality holes on thin materials, but with the thickness of the material exceeding 2 mm, there are also some problems in the machined micro-holes, including the taper and non-circular outlet holes. Based on our previous works [68–71]. In this article, the micro-hole processing of femtosecond laser on thick nickel-base superalloy with ther- mal barrier coating is studied. The influence of focus position and power on the quality of microhole processing is studied. An optimized process scheme for reducing microholes taper and improving machining quality is proposed, which can improve the quality of out- let hole and reduces the taper of microhole. 2. Experimental The thick nickel-based superalloys with thermal barrier coatings (with thickness of 2.3 mm) were used in the experiments. As shown in Figure 1, the material is divided 38/[376] C. LU ET AL.

[PAGE 4] into three layers: the metal substrate is 2 mm thick Inconel 718 superalloy. Then a NiCoCrAlYTa bond coat (BC) layer of 120 lm thickness was prepared by supersonic flame spraying. Finally there exists a layer of thermal barrier coating (TBC) which main component is yttrium stabilized zirconia (7YSZ) of 180 lm thickness was prepared by plasma spraying. The femtosecond laser drilling experimental device is shown in Figure 2. The femto- second laser has a wavelength of 800 nm, delivered the average power in the range of 0.5–4 W at a repetition rate of 1KHz with a nominal pulse duration of 120fs. The polar- ization state of femtosecond laser was linear polarization with Gaussian distribution energy distribution. A combination of a half-wave plate and cubic beam splitter prism was used to achieve laser power ranging from 1 W to 2 W. The femtosecond laser was focused through a lens with a focal length of 200 mm. The diameter of the laser spot after being focused was about 22 mm. The diameter of drilling holes was set at 200 lm. In the experiment, the sample was placed on a computer-controlled ufab three- dimensional movable stage. Using rotating cutting method to process holes, the work- piece was fixed on ufab platform and the femtosecond laser beam was kept motionless. Figure 1. Structure of thermal barrier coated nickel superalloy. Figure 2. Experimental apparatus for preparing deep holes by femtosecond laser filament formation. FERROELECTRICS 39/[377]

[PAGE 5] By means of the interpolation motion of two axes to achieve the purpose of rotary cut- ting, As shown in Figure 3a. The maximum rotary cutting speed achieved by ufab is 200 um/s. The rotating ufab platform made the laser form a series of circumferential contours on the surface of the workpiece and removed the material layer by layer. Finally, a small hole with a certain radius was formed. The scanning trajectory is shown in Figure 3b. In each cycle, a certain amount of material was removed and this process was repeated to achieve the purpose of rotary cutting through the hole. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. The influence of femtosecond laser focus position In order to determine the optimal focus position under different laser power, focus pos- ition was chosen as a variable at the specific powers to determine the influence of laser focus position on the machining process. The laser power was set to 1 W, 1.5 W and 2 W, respectively. The radius of rotation was 100 lm, while the speed of rotation was Figure 3. Processing schematic. 40/[378] C. LU ET AL.

[PAGE 6] 200 lm/s. The focus position parameters in the experiments were shown in Table 1. The positive number indicates that the geometric focus is above the workpiece, 0 indi- cates that the geometric focus is on the surface of the workpiece, the negative number indicates that the geometric focus is located inside the workpiece. The specific value indicates the distance between the geometric focus and the surface of the sample. The optimal machining focus position under each laser power was judged by the difference among the processing time, the diameter of the entrance hole and the set diameter of rotating cutting. The relationship between the diameter of the entrance hole and the focus position at 1 W, 1.5 W and 2 W power is shown in Figure 4. In the experiment, the diameter of the hole entrance firstly decreased and then increased with the focus position from 0.5 mm to 4mm. When the defocusing amount reached 1 mm, the time consumption for machining the through hole had little difference. The results above indicate that when the micro-hole is machined by low repetition frequency femtosecond laser, a certain amount of defocusing is needed to optimize the accuracy and efficiency of machining. From the analysis of the Figure, it can be concluded that the optimal machining focus position at 1.5 W and 2 W power is 2 mm, 3 mm and 3.5 mm, respectively. Figure 5 shows that the microstructure of machined micro-hole wall was also closely related to the different focus position when the power of femtosecond laser was 1.5 W. With the increase of defocus, the quality of hole wall increased and the taper became smaller. The experimental results show that the machining effect of the sample when focus position located on the surface was not different from that of the positive defocus, which indicated that the geometric focus was not the maximum energy position after laser focusing. Due to the Kerr self-focusing phenomenon of femtosecond laser propa- gating in air and the defocusing effect of the plasma phenomena, the maximum energy position of femtosecond laser was not the geometric focus, but shifted to the incidence side, which means negative defocusing is needed in the process of machining. With the increase of femtosecond laser power, the influence of Kerr self-focusing and plasma phenomena on the laser energy distribution along the laser propagation direction become greater, so the maximum energy point is far away from the position of geomet- ric focus. Therefore, the optimal defocusing amount under different power is different. The larger the power is, the more defocusing it needs. The quality of the micro-holes machined under the optimal defocusing amount was improved, but the diameter of out- let hole was relatively small. With the increase of defocusing amount, the maximum energy position is closer to the exit, and the absorbed of laser energy at the exit side increases. The removal of materials increased and exports expanded. As shown in Figure 6, however, the morphology of outlet drilled under 1.5 W power with optimal defocusing is rectangular. The analysis of this phenomenon was shown in the third sec- tion. Therefore, it is necessary to further improve its processing technology. Table 1. Focus position set during the experiments. Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Focus position(mm) þ0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 FERROELECTRICS 41/[379]