[PAGE 1] Experimental evaluation of CFRP-strengthened shear walls with various CFRP configurations Binlin Zhang a,b, Liu Jin a,*, Ou Zhao b, Fengjuan Chen a, Xiuli Du a a Key Laboratory of Urban Security and Disaster Engineering of Ministry of Education, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China b School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Experimental evaluation Seismic performance CFRP-strengthened shear wall CFRP configurations Strengthening efficiency A B S T R A C T This paper evaluates the seismic performance of carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP)-strengthened shear walls under various CFRP configurations. A comprehensive experimental investigation was conducted on five shear walls specimens. One specimen served as un-strengthened reference specimen, while the remaining four were respectively strengthened using horizontal, X-shaped, combined, and fully wrapped CFRP strips. Based on the test results, the effects of CFRP configurations on the failure modes, shear bearing capacities, and defor­ mation capabilities were thoroughly evaluated. At the same CFRP ratio, the combined strip method significantly enhanced the shear bearing capacity by 27.8 % compared to the un-strengthened specimen. In contrast, the X- shaped strip method showed a limited increase in shear bearing capacity of 6.39 %. Further analyses on the strengthening efficiency of different CFRP configurations revealed that horizontal strips method exhibited the highest strengthening efficiency for the shear strength, stiffness, ductility, and energy dissipation, while the X- shaped method exhibited the least effectiveness due to early debonding of the CFRP strips. Finally, the actual shear contribution of CFRP obtained from experiments were compared with the predicted values from current standards, with the comparison results revealing an overestimation of the CFRP shear contribution. To improve the accuracy of CFRP shear contribution predictions, the effective strain reduction coefficient capturing the effects of CFRP configurations was proposed. 1. Introduction Shear walls are fundamental in countering shear forces induced by seismic activities [1,2]. Despite their critical role, these structures often face challenges throughout their design, construction, and service pha­ ses, including inadequate strength, insufficient reinforcement, and poor mechanical properties [3,4]. Additional complications arise from architectural modifications, such as openings in the shear walls, which compromise their structural integrity. Field investigations [5,6] following earthquakes in Turkey consistently pointed to substandard concrete quality as a primary factor in structural failure [7]. The lack of adequate horizontal web reinforcements and below-standard concrete tensile strengths have resulted in pronounced shear damage [5]. The concurrent use of ribbed and plain steel reinforcements in seismic zones, a practice prevalent prior to the TEC-1998 [8] regulations, has further contributed to these vulnerabilities [9]. Moreover, architectural alter­ ations, such as the installation of windows, have led to an increase in shear forces, exacerbating the risk of short column effects [10,11]. Considering the progressive deterioration of in-service shear walls and their essential seismic mitigation role, there is an imperative need for effective retrofitting and strengthening strategies to enhance their seismic performance. The application of Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) composites to the surfaces of elements represents an enhancement over traditional reinforcement methods for strengthening mechanical prop­ erties [12,13]. Pioneering studies, such as those by Saadatmanesh [14] and Altin et al. [15], have demonstrated the significant seismic perfor­ mance improvements of shear walls strengthened with Glass Fiber Reinforced Plastic (GFRP) and Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP), respectively. Taking advantages of shear strength enhancement and environmental degradation resistance of these materials, subse­ quent researches efforts were made in this field. Scholars explored the effects of various shear span ratios, FRP material and strengthening anchorage types on shear wall performance [16–18]. For instances, Woods et al. [19] evaluated the effectiveness of using externally bonded CFRP strips for seismic strengthening of shear walls with different shear span ratios. Their results show that minor changes in shear span ratio * Corresponding author. E-mail address: kinglew2007@163.com (L. Jin). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Thin-Walled Structures journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tws https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tws.2024.112862 Received 8 July 2024; Received in revised form 2 November 2024; Accepted 18 December 2024 Thin–Walled Structures 208 (2025) 112862 Available online 22 December 2024 0263-8231/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

[PAGE 2] significantly affect the effectiveness of seismic reinforcement of CFRP, with higher ratios improving deformation and energy dissipation. Similarly, Antoniades et al. [16] and Ghobarah et al. [17] examined the use of GFRP and CFRP, and both noted the efficacy in preventing the propagation of concrete cracks and improving the bearing capacities. Among the studies, Antoniades et al. [16] showed an increase in strength of about 30 % relative to conventionally repaired specimen when proper GFRP anchoring strips were used. Additionally, Ghobarah et al. [17] also illustrated that the wall repaired with CFRP sustained an average of 50 % more load and experienced 60 % more lateral drift compared to the control wall. In evaluating the seismic performance of FRP-strengthened shear walls, calculating the shear contribution of CFRP strips is crucial, as it directly reflects the effectiveness of the strengthening. While researches on FRP-strengthened shear walls have advanced, yielding predictive models for FRP shear contribution in standards such as the ACI 440.2 guide [20] and the CSA S806 standard [21], these models primarily address horizontal FRP strip strengthening. However, the effectiveness of other configurations, such as diagonal and combined strip strength­ ening, remains underexplored. Additionally, several scholars have highlighted discrepancies be­ tween experimental results and the predictions from these standards. For instance, Woods et al. [19] found that the predicted CFRP shear contributions according to the CSA S806 standard [21] were signifi­ cantly higher than the experimentally measured values, overestimating the contribution by 165.4 % and 122.4 % for CFRP-strengthened shear walls with aspect ratios of 1.20 and 0.85, respectively. Similarly, Antoniades et al. [18] compared the ACI 440.2 guide [20] predictions with experimental results from CFRP/GFRP-strengthened shear walls, finding overestimations ranging from 35.3 % to 159.7 %. The discrep­ ancies were attributed to the lack of consideration in the guide expres­ sions for the concept of defining the ultimate condition under shear loading as the exceedance of the CFRP strain value at the level where the shear crack width is maximum. Altin et al. [15] also observed that the ACI 440.2 guide [20] overestimated the shear strength of CFRP-strengthened shear walls by 22 % in scaled hysteresis tests. In summary, current research on FRP-strengthened shear walls in­ dicates that existing standards primarily focus on predicting the shear contribution of horizontal CFRP strips and often overestimate this contribution. These limitations highlight the inadequacy of current predictions for the shear contribution of CFRP in strengthened shear walls. Particularly for various CFRP configurations, both the seismic performance assessment and calculation methods for CFRP contribu­ tions remain insufficient. To address these issues, this paper systematically evaluates the in­ fluence of different CFRP configurations on the seismic performance of CFRP-strengthened shear walls by experiments. By performing quasi- static testing on five shear wall specimens with the same shear span ratio (set as 1.0) but strengthened by different wrapping methods, this study intends to discern the distinct influences of different strengthening methods on failure modes, deformation capacities, and seismic perfor­ mance indicators of shear walls. The tested strengthening methods are as follows: horizontal, X-shaped, combined, and fully wrapped CFRP strips. A comparative analysis was conducted to determine the most cost- effective strengthening method, thereby contributing to the optimiza­ tion of retrofitting strategies for enhanced bearing capacity and seismic performance indicators. Finally, the actual shear contribution of CFRP with different strengthening methods obtained from experiments were compared with the predicted values from current standards. To improve the accuracy of CFRP shear contribution predictions, the effective strain reduction coefficient capturing the effects of CFRP configurations was proposed. 2. Experimental program In the present experiment, five shear wall specimens with varied CFRP configurations were assembled and subjected to cyclic loading tests. This section elaborates on the preparatory procedures of the test, providing a detailed account of the specimen characteristics, material properties, and test setup. 2.1. Specimen details Drawing from experiments on CFRP-strengthened beams and shear walls, four common and effective CFRP shear strengthening methods were selected: horizontal, X-shaped, combined and fully wrapped strip configurations. An un-strengthened shear wall served as the reference specimen. Given the spatial dimensions and instrument capacity of laboratory, and in accordance with Chinese standards [22], the height, length and thickness of the specimens were set at 1200 mm, 1200 mm and 160 mm, respectively. The reinforcement ratios for horizontal and longitudinal were established at 0.25 % and 0.36 %, and the CFRP ratio for each method was standardized at 0.14 % by following formula [23, 24]: ρf = 2nftfwf sfD (1) with nf, tf, wf and sf the number, thickness, width, and spacing of CFRP strips, respectively; D the thickness of the shear wall. It is essential to elucidate that the thickness of the wall (D) incorporated into the thickness of the CFRP strips (tf) [23,24]. Fig. 1 depicts the reinforcement layout of the shear wall specimen and different wrapping methods of CFRP strips, with detailed informa­ tion such as the diameter and spacing of the horizontal and longitudinal reinforcement in the shear wall. Table 1 also describes in detail the number, width, and center-to-center spacing of the CFRP strips for the four CFRP strengthening methods. The process of applying external CFRP strips consists of five key steps. First, surface treatment is performed on both sides and the corners of the shear wall to ensure proper adhesion. Next, an adhesive layer is evenly applied to the concrete surface, filling any gaps or irregularities. Subsequently, a layer of epoxy resin is applied, and a fully saturated CFRP strip is affixed to the designated area. After the CFRP strip is applied, excess epoxy resin is removed using a spatula to reduce the thickness of the adhesive thickness, thereby minimizing any negative impact on the bonding process. Finally, all CFRP-strengthened shear wall specimens are cured at room temperature for at least seven days before testing. Regarding the specific strengthening techniques, for both X-shaped and combined strips CFRP-strengthened specimens, the diagonal strips are applied first. Once these strips are securely in place, horizontal strips are applied at the ends and outer surfaces. The horizontal strips serve as an anchoring mechanism. Additionally, CFRP strips for all specimens are installed with an overlap length to ensure secure bonding to the shear wall surface. 2.2. Material properties In line with the Chinese standard [25], fifteen cubic (150 × 150 × 150 mm) and fifteen prismatic (150 × 150 × 300 mm) test blocks were produced to assess the physical and mechanical properties of concrete simultaneously with the shear wall casting. The results revealed that the concrete specimens demonstrated an average compressive strength of 53.3 MPa, representing the maximum pressure that cubic specimens can withstand per unit area. The average axial compressive strength is 50.9 MPa, which indicates the maximum pressure that prismatic specimens can withstand per unit area along their axis. Additionally, the average splitting tensile strength is 5.6 MPa, and the average elastic modulus is 42.3 GPa. Furthermore, Table 2 details the outcomes of tensile tests [25] conducted to determine the mechanical properties of the major steel bar. For the Hot-rolled Ribbed Bar (HRB) 335 ф6, HRB335 ф8, and HRB335 B. Zhang et al. Thin-Walled Structures 208 (2025) 112862 2

[PAGE 3] ф10, a total of 10 specimens for each type of steel bar were tested. The CFRP strips, purchased from the Kaben Company, were con­ structed from high-strength CFS-I-200 carbon fiber. These strips are comprised of a polyacrylonitrile-based 12 K carbon fiber, characterized by a weight of 206.4 g/m² and a nominal thickness of 0.111 mm. Table 2 provides the performance parameters of CFRP materials. To enhance the adherence of the CFRP strips, epoxy resin CFSR-A/B, also supplied by the Kaben Company, was utilized. The mechanical properties of this resin include a tensile strength of 61 MPa, an elongation at break of 2.0 %, and a tensile modulus of 3700 MPa. 2.3. Test setup and instrumentation Fig. 2 illustrates the schematic diagram of the test setup. The shear wall specimens were secured to the rigid floor using anchor bolts. The vertical actuator is mounted on the top loading frame and connected to horizontal rails, allowing lateral movement while maintaining a con­ stant vertical load, as shown in the partially enlarged picture in Fig. 2. This configuration ensures the stability and alignment of the load application, while the roller mechanism enables smooth lateral displacement of the specimen under cyclic loading. Furthermore, using this setup allows the axial compression ratio (defined as the ratio of applied axial force to the design value of the axial compressive strength of the concrete) to be consistently maintained at 0.1 for all specimens, which corresponds to an axial force of 275 kN. In the horizontal direc­ tion, a 200,000 kg MTS horizontal actuator fixed to the counter wall and connected to the top of the specimen facilitates the application of the horizontal cyclic load. To ensure consistency of test conditions, the loading rate was maintained at 0.1 mm/s for each specimen. During the test, it is mainly necessary to record the applied load, collect strain data through strain gauges, and measure the displacement using displacement gauges. The arrangement of the Linear Variable Displacement Transducer (LVDT) is shown in Fig. 3(a). A total of nine LVDTs were installed in the experiment to monitor the displacement variations of the CFRP-strengthened shear wall specimens. Additionally, the loading regime is divided into two stages, following the guidelines of JCJ/T 101–2015 [22], and this division is detailed in Fig. 3(b). In the test, the horizontal load is applied using displacement control. Before reaching the predicted yield point (i.e., 1.0 % drift ratio), the load is divided into eight levels. After the drift ratio exceeds 1.0 %, the drift ratio for each level increases by 0.2 %, and each cycle is repeated twice until the horizontal load of the specimen drops to 85 % of the peak load [22]. At last, to achieve a more comprehensive load-displacement curve, the loading process was extended. However, to maintain test safety, the Fig. 1. Reinforcement layout diagram and schematic representation of CFRP configuration for all specimens. Table 1 CFRP configuration information for all specimens. Group CFRP Layer n CFRP Width wf (mm) Center-to- center spacing sf (mm) Spe. (a) Un-strengthened shear wall – – – Spe. (b) horizontal strengthened 2 200 400 Spe. (c) X-shaped strengthened 3 300 900 Spe. (d) combined strengthened Horizontal strips 1 300 450 Diagonal strip 1 300 900 Spe. (e) fully strengthened 1 1200 – Table 2 Mechanical properties of steel bars, CFRP and epoxy resin. Material Elastic modulus, E (MPa) Yield strength, fy (MPa) Ultimate strength, fu (MPa) Yield strain εy (%) Ultimate strain εu (%) Steel bar (HRB) Steel ф6 198,000.0* 376.3* 630.3* 0.190 * – Steel ф8 224,000.0* 432.0* 637.3* 0.193 * – Steel ф10 208,000.0* 392.3* 597.0* 0.189 * – CFRP 250,000.0+ – 3453.7+ – 1.7+ Epoxy resin 2900.0+ ​ 60.1+ ​ 3.4+ Note: * Data were obtained from the present test. + Data were derived from sample inspection values as detailed in the material specification sheet provided by Kaben Company. B. Zhang et al. Thin-Walled Structures 208 (2025) 112862 3

[PAGE 4] loading cycle was performed only once. 3. Seismic performance of CFRP-Strengthened shear walls 3.1. Observed behavior The observed behaviors of CFRP-strengthened shear wall specimens are depicted in Fig. 4, showcasing the failure behaviors of shear walls with horizontal, X-shaped, combined and fully wrapped CFRP strips. Setting the shear span ratio for all specimens as 1.0, a pronounced shear failure was observed in the un-strengthened shear wall specimen compared to others. The specimen ultimately displayed two distinct diagonal shear cracks, with concrete crushing occurs at the bottom corners. The following text describes the failure behaviors of shear wall with different wrapping methods. For horizontal strip CFRP-strengthened shear wall, fewer cracks were observed compared to the reference shear wall specimen. During the cyclic loading process, at a displace­ ment of −8 mm, the middle part of the horizontal strip experienced delamination due to cyclic push-pull loading, resulting in a slight debonding between the upper edge of the middle strip and the concrete surface. As the loading displacement reached +16 mm, the lower hori­ zontal strips began to debonding, and the gap between the CFRP strips and the concrete surface was widened. At a displacement of −20 mm, slight fracturing of the CFRP strip occurred at the corners, and a hori­ zontal crack developed in the middle of the lower horizontal strip. With an increase in displacement to +35 mm, the lower horizontal CFRP strips underwent significant rupturing, tearing into multiple pieces and bursting away from the concrete surface, leading to the loss of load- bearing capacity and resulting a structural failure. As for the X-shaped strip CFRP-strengthened shear wall, the initial response during loading was similar to that observed by horizontal strengthened specimen. When the displacement reached −28 mm, se­ vere rupturing occurred at the lower left corner, where the diagonal strip and horizontal restraining strip ruptured at a 45◦angle, leading to the diagonal strip losing its strengthening effect and debonding from the concrete. In contrast to horizontal and X-shaped strengthened speci­ mens, the combined strips CFRP-strengthened specimen did not exhibit significant debonding during loading. This absence of debonding can be attributed to the anchoring effect of the horizontal strips within the combined CFRP configuration, which effectively mitigated debonding. Moreover, the integral nature of the fully wrapped CFRP-strengthened specimen contributed to its apparent resistance to debonding. Howev­ er, at a displacement of −28 mm, the CFRP strip at the lower left corner of the combined CFRP-strengthened specimen ruptured. On the side of the wall, the CFRP strips at the corners were completely ruptured, exposing the steel reinforcement. For the fully wrapped specimen, CFRP strips ruptured only at the bottom of the wall. The severe damage to the bottom concrete, coupled with outward bursting, led to the rupturing of the CFRP. In summary, the different CFRP strengthening methods resulted in distinct failure modes of the shear wall specimens. On one hand, externally bonded CFRP strips effectively restrained crack propagation on the shear wall surface, which led to stress concentration within the Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the test setup. Fig. 3. Sketch of the (a) LVDTs, and (b) loading history. B. Zhang et al. Thin-Walled Structures 208 (2025) 112862 4

[PAGE 5] CFRP strips and subsequently caused rupture in the CFRP material. On the other hand, when the epoxy adhesive layer bonding the CFRP strips failed prior to the CFRP material, debonding occurred as a result of adhesive failure. Specifically, horizontal strips primarily exhibited debonding and rupture, X-shaped strips experienced severe rupturing at diagonal intersections, while the combined strengthening method effectively mitigated debonding due to the anchoring effect. The fully wrapped specimen showed strong resistance to debonding but Fig. 4. Failure behaviors of the tested CFRP-strengthened shear walls. Fig. 5. Typical failure modes of CFRP-strengthened shear walls with different CFRP strengthening configurations. B. Zhang et al. Thin-Walled Structures 208 (2025) 112862 5

[PAGE 6] ultimately failed due to concentrated ruptures at the bottom of the wall. 3.2. Typical failure modes Throughout the loading process, the described failure behaviors encompass all tested shear wall specimens. To provide a clearer depic­ tion of the failure modes, the CFRP strips was removed post-failure, and the typical failure patterns of each specimen are illustrated in Fig. 5. The un-strengthened shear wall specimen exhibited two significant through-length diagonal cracks on the concrete surface, indicative of a classic shear failure mode. Conversely, the concrete surface of horizontal CFRP- strengthened shear wall also displayed noticeable diagonal cracks, but these did not extend to the top of the wall. Additionally, distinct horizontal bending cracks were present, indicating a flexure- shear failure mode. Similarly, X-shaped CFRP-strengthened shear wall specimen exhibited both shear diagonal cracks and bending horizontal cracks, albeit in fewer numbers compared to the un-strengthened spec­ imen and horizontal strengthened specimens, also reflecting a flexure- shear failure mode. The combined CFRP-strengthened specimen dis­ played only shear diagonal cracks on the concrete surface, which did not extend to the top of the wall, and lacked horizontal bending cracks, presenting a shear failure. Distinct from the four previously mentioned specimens, which exhibited shear and flexure-shear failure modes, the fully wrapped specimen differed markedly. The most significant damage occurred at the lower section of specimen (the interface between the wall and the base), where severe horizontal sliding cracks developed along the bot­ tom of the wall, accompanied by diagonal shear cracks, culminating in a bottom shear-slip failure mode. In summary, the application of CFRP effectively mitigated the progression of the primary diagonal shear cracks. Furthermore, various configurations of CFRP led to alterations in the inherent shear failure modes observed in the shear walls. 3.3. Load-deflection responses As shown in Fig. 6, the hysteresis curves for shear wall specimens under different CFRP configurations reveal notable differences, pri­ marily in peak load, corresponding displacement, and the area enclosed by the curves (i.e., energy dissipation capacity). In terms of energy dissipation capacity, the hysteresis curves for CFRP-strengthened shear walls demonstrate significantly larger enclosed areas compared to the un-strengthened specimens, indicating improved energy absorption. This improvement is closely related to the configuration of the CFRP strips. Among the different methods, the fully wrapped strengthened specimen exhibits the fullest hysteresis loop, signifying the highest energy dissipation capacity and plastic deforma­ tion ability. Regarding peak load and corresponding displacement, all CFRP strengthening methods resulted in a noticeable improvement compared to the un-strengthened Reinforced Concrete (RC) shear wall. The com­ bined and fully wrapped specimens showed the highest peak loads, followed by horizontally strip-strengthened specimens. The X-shaped configuration, while providing the smallest increase in peak load, exhibited the largest displacement. 3.4. Load-bearing capacity Skeleton curves, derived from the hysteresis curves of each spec­ imen, are depicted in Fig. 7, which includes zoomed-in sections to illustrate the peak loads in both positive and negative directions. Overall, the skeleton curves of un-strengthened shear wall, compared to those of CFRP-strengthened shear wall specimens, exhibit less pro­ nounced descending segments, indicating a more abrupt failure following peak load attainment. In contrast, the application of CFRP strips leads to a noticeable descending segment in the skeleton curve, signifying that the structure maintains a certain load-bearing capacity Fig. 6. Hysteretic curves of specimens with different CFRP configurations. B. Zhang et al. Thin-Walled Structures 208 (2025) 112862 6