[PAGE 1] Deformation and cracking near a hole in an oxide-forming alloy foil subjected to thermal cycling F.-X. Li, K.-J. Kang ⇑ Department of Mechanical Systems Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea Received 17 September 2012; accepted 30 September 2012 Available online 27 October 2012 Abstract This work investigates the behavior of a hole on an alumina-forming alloy coupon subjected to thermal cyclic loading. The experi- ments, performed using a unique facility, revealed that a hole often deformed and cracked. To explain the phenomenon, the stress near a hole and the consequent deformation or cracking were analyzed and traced according to the loading cycles by theoretical approaches based on material properties of thermally grown oxide (TGO) and the substrate, including creep deformation, oxidation rate and growth strain, some of which were also measured by the facility, while others, such as the temperature-dependent material properties, were real- istically assumed. The analytic solution for a two-dimensional model gave fairly good estimations of the mechanical behavior of the holes in comparison with the experimental observations, and the analytic solution was validated by numerical analysis for a three-dimensional model with TGO on the lateral surfaces. These results demonstrated that, without the cooling air ﬂow, the subsequent thermal gradient or underlying bond-coated superalloy, deformation or cracking may occur near the cooling holes in turbine blades in gas turbine engines purely by thermal cycling, depending on the number of loading cycles.  2012 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Keywords: Thermal barrier coating; Thermally grown oxide; Gas turbine; Hot corrosion; Crack 1. Introduction To protect turbine blades in gas turbine engines from hot corrosion and other damage, thermal barrier coatings (TBC) and ﬁlm cooling have been used. In ﬁlm cooling, cool air is bled from the compressor stage, ducted to the internal channels of the turbine blades, and discharged through small holes on the blade surface, creating a ﬁlm of cooling air that further protects the blade surface from the hot mainstream ﬂow [1]. Many studies have been reported on the thermal distribution near a cooling hole [1–5]. The TBC system shielding the metal substrate against high temperatures typically consists of four layers: the top porous zirconia coating; the thermally-grown oxide (TGO) layer; the bond coat (BC); and the underlying superalloy substrate [6]. As a result of the chemical reaction between metal cations and oxygen anions, which diﬀuse outwards from BC and inward from the air at high temperatures, respectively, the TGO layer forms to help protect the underlying substrates from high-temperature corrosion. During service, however, a substantial level of stress is gen- erated within the TGO layer, as the TBC system is sub- jected to thermal cycling. The induced stress can cause the TGO layer to separate, buckle and even crack [7–9]. Two sources of the stress created in the TGO layer can account for the TBC failure mechanism. One is the mis- match of the coeﬃcients of thermal expansion (CTE) between the TGO and the metal substrate. The other is the TGO formation in the lateral (in-plane) direction. At high temperatures, a portion of the new TGO forms along the boundaries between the existing TGO grains that grew vertically from the interface and pushes the neighboring, existing TGO grains toward two lateral sides. This pushing results in compressive stress in the TGO layer. When cooled to room temperature, this stress may increase up 1359-6454/$36.00  2012 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2012.09.077 ⇑Corresponding author. Tel.: +82 62 530 1668; fax: +82 62 530 1689. E-mail address: kjkang@jnu.ac.kr (K.-J. Kang). www.elsevier.com/locate/actamat Available online at www.sciencedirect.com Acta Materialia 61 (2013) 385–398

[PAGE 2] to 3–6 GPa because of the added stress due to the mis- match of the CTE [6,10–12]. TGO instability is also aﬀected by initial geometric imperfections such as undulations or grooves pre-existing on the interface with the BC. According to the experiments of Mumm et al. [13], the amplitude of a surface undulation was increased as the TGO thickened upon thermal cycling. Spitsberg et al. [14] extended theses experiments and inves- tigated the eﬀects of various grit-blasting processes of the initial BC surface on the TGO instability. TBC durability was signiﬁcantly enhanced by the pretreatment that removed the imperfections on the BC surface. Rebollo et al. [15] used Fecralloye coupons with a single groove on the surface and showed that the edges of the groove dis- placed upwards, while the base displaced downwards dur- ing each thermal cycle accompanying oxidation. In contrast, in the isothermal case, the displacements were minor. For analysis of the thermal stress occurring near an imperfection on the substrate subjected to thermal cycling, Hsueh and Fuller [16] and Hsueh [17] used a model consist- ing of three concentric spherical (or cylindrical) shells of TBC, TGO and BC. Then, the residual radial stresses at the TBC/TGO and the TGO/BC interfaces as functions of the TGO thickness were presented. Karlsson et al. [18,19] explored a more fundamental understanding for the one-way displacement of TGO by devising a spherically symmetric model with a thin shell and the surrounding medium, which represented the TGO and the BC, respec- tively. In the model, the displacement of the TGO was monitored as the system was subjected to various thermal cycling histories. Segments of the cyclic thermal history were deﬁned by the occurrence of yielding in the BC and TGO. A numerical simulation by the ﬁnite element method was used to verify the main implications of the results obtained from the analytic model. However, in their stud- ies, several important material properties were assumed or idealized, not based on experimental measurements. For example, the yield strengths of TGO and BC were assumed to be constant, regardless of temperature and regardless of whether they were in a state of tension or compression. Recently, Kang and his colleagues [20,21] developed a noble small-scale material tester that can measure the mechanical properties of an alloy at high temperature, using a ribbon specimen. The high temperature was achieved by Joule heat, which was generated by the elec- tricity passing through the specimen. With this method of heating, the specimen did not have to be enclosed by heat- ing elements, so it was exposed for in situ observation. A loading device taken from a precision balance varied the load level by moving a counter-mass, which was controlled remotely. This tester has been used successfully to measure the creep properties of alumina or chromia TGO and sub- strate metals at high temperature [22–25]. And also the measured tensile or creep properties of TGO and substrate alloys were used for ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) of the morphological changes near a surface groove [26,27]. The result showed fairly good agreement with the experimental observations, validating the material property data and the eﬀectiveness of this tester. The present authors suspect that the cooling hole could be another major source of TBC failure, in addition to the surface groove or unevenness. In fact, a number of papers have reported cracking near cooling holes in turbine blades. Mostly, temperature gradients associated with air passing through the holes are regarded as a main source of stress or failure occurring near the holes [28,29]. How- ever, it has been also reported that the holes could be stress concentrators inducing cracks, regardless of air ﬂow through them [30,31]. Whatever the cause, if excessive deformation or cracks occur near a cooling hole and, con- sequently, the TGO layer and the over-laying zirconia top coat fail, hot corrosion will concentrate in the region and, ﬁnally, cracks will initiate in the underlying superalloy. In this work, as a preliminary model study of the cooling holes as stress concentrators without consideration of the cooling air ﬂow, the subsequent thermal gradient or under- lying bond-coated superalloy, the mechanical behavior near a hole in a foil subjected to thermal cycling is investi- gated. Coupons of an alumina-forming alloy with a circu- lar hole at the center were used as specimens. Deformation and cracking occurring near the holes of the specimens were monitored upon cycling. With more realistic material properties, such as the temperature-dependent yield strengths, taken into account, the interaction between TGO growth and thermal cycling, and the subsequent deformation were theoretically analyzed and validated by comparison with the results of the experiments and numer- ical analysis. 2. Experiments 2.1. Specimens and test system BC alloy is not commercially available. Fecralloy (Fe72.8/Cr22/Al5/Y0.02/Zr0.09 in wt.%) forms a uniform a-Al2O3 scale without voids at the interface between the oxide and alloy, just as the BC alloy does in a TBC system. Therefore, as in a number of previous works [15,20,21,23,32], Fecralloy was used as the model material in this experiment, to simulate the behavior of the BC alloys. A Fecralloy foil was cut into a number of coupons 50 mm long, 5 mm wide and 0.35 mm thick. A small hole 1 mm in diameter was machined into the center of each specimen, using a mini-drill, and the surfaces were mechan- ically ground and polished to a 1 lm ﬁnish. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; S-4700 instru- ment) was used to measure the initial morphology of the holes. Fig. 1 shows an SEM image. Before testing, each specimen was cleaned in acetone, and its dimensions and weight were measured within accuracies of ±10 lm and ed wlg. A small-scale material tester designed for foil specimens [20,21] was used in this research. Fig. 2 shows a schematic 386 F.-X. Li, K.-J. Kang / Acta Materialia 61 (2013) 385–398

[PAGE 3] of the tester. For testing, the specimen was mounted between the upper and lower friction grips. The displace- ment of the specimen was measured on the top end of the moving upper grip by a mirror attached on the top end and an IR laser position sensor (EM4SYS, model HEAD-TR1). Two IR pyrometers mounted above each other in front of the tester were used to continuously mon- itor the specimen temperature and the TGO thickness being formed on the surface. Technical details about the loading and measuring system are described in the authors’ previous papers [20,21]. 2.2. Experimental conditions and deformation ﬁeld measurement The specimens were subjected to three diﬀerent thermal loading conditions, i.e., isothermal cycle, 20 slow cycles, and 200 fast cycles. Each thermal cycle consisted of a 5 min ramp-up to maximum temperature 1200 C, a spe- ciﬁc dwell period at that temperature, a 5 min decline to ambient temperature, and a 2 min dwell period at the ambi- ent temperature. In order that all the specimens had an almost constant thickness of TGO at the end of each exper- iment, regardless of the loading condition, the periods of dwelling at the maximum temperature were set at 10 h, 30 min and 3 min for the loading conditions of the isother- mal cycle, the 20 slow cycles and the 200 fast cycles, respec- tively [23]. In order to quantify the deformation occurring near the holes, displacement ﬁelds were measured in situ at the max- imum temperature. Before the tests, an alumina powder– water mixture was sprayed onto each specimen and dried, which left clear random dots on the surface. Images were taken of the dots on the surface of the specimen during the test, and these dots on the images enabled strain map- ping, i.e., the dots served as the speckle pattern, which was used to measure the displacement ﬁeld via the Digital Image Correlation (DIC) technique using commercial VIC-2D software (http://www.correlatedsolutions.com) [25]. 3. Experimental results Fig. 3 shows SEM photos of the TGO morphology near the holes after the three diﬀerent thermal loadings. In the ﬁgure, the deformation was more prominent for the load- ing consisting of the larger number of cycles, although the total time dwelling at the maximum temperature was set constant, and the ﬁnal TGO thickness was almost the same for the three loadings. After the isothermal cycle loading, hardly any deformation and no cracks were observed (Fig. 3a), but, after the 20 slow cycles, deforma- tion and cracks were observed along the edge and the inner surface of the hole (Fig. 3b). After the 200 fast cycles, the deformation was more vivid, and the cracks were spread from the inner surface of the hole to the outer region (Fig. 3c). All the cracks formed along the grain boundaries. As the cycles were repeated, the cracks not only length- ened, but also widened to expose the substrate to secondary oxidation. Moreover, based on the deformation results, it was obvious that the diameter of the hole changed accord- ing to the thermal loading (compare the three photos in Fig. 3a–c). Fig. 4 shows an example of the image of a specimen sur- face taken by the CCD camera and the contours of dis- placement measured by the strain mapping technique in VIC-2D. From a series of measured contours, the strain variation was calculated with the elapsed cycle. Fig. 5 shows the variations in the hoop strain ehh at the edge, i.e., point A in Fig. 4, during the 20 slow cycles. The strain increased with the cycles from zero to ehh = 0.040. Because of the axisymmetric stress state, the hoop strain can be sim- ply calculated from the change in the hole diameter, i.e., ehh = DR/R. The direct measurements of the hole diameters from the SEM photos before and after the test give ehh = 0.041, which is indicated as the big solid circle in Fig. 5. The strain agrees very well with that calculated from the contours of displacement measured by VIC-2D, so the strain measurements are validated. Fig. 1. Conﬁgurations of the specimen and hole. Fig. 2. Block diagram of the small-scale material tester. F.-X. Li, K.-J. Kang / Acta Materialia 61 (2013) 385–398 387

[PAGE 4] 4. Analytic solution In order to explain the experimental results, an analytic solution for the stress and strain distribution near a hole was derived, using an approach similar to that adopted by Karlsson et al. [18], i.e., ﬁrst allowing the strains to occur unconstrained, and then imposing the traction needed to ensure displacement and traction continuity. Fig. 6 is the schematic of the derivation procedure. The TGO was presented as a thin cylindrical shell of initial thickness h and radius R ﬁtted to an inﬁnite metallic sub- strate with a hole. The TGO and substrate were assumed to be elastic–perfectly plastic with their respective yield strengths changing as a function of temperature. The math- ematical details are presented in the following. One cycle consists of three steps: dwelling at the maxi- mum temperature; cooling; and heating (Fig. 7). At the maximum temperature To, the system is driven by the increment of growth strain of the TGO layer Deg. During cooling to room temperature TRT and heating up to To, Fig. 3. SEM photos on the holes after (a) isothermal cycle, (b) 20 slow cycles and (c) 200 fast cycles of thermal loading with the maximum temperature of 1200 C. Fig. 4. An example of contour map of displacement in the x-direction measured by a strain mapping technique around the hole. Fig. 5. Variations in the hoop strain ehh at the edge, i.e., point A in Fig. 4, during the 20 slow thermal cycles. 388 F.-X. Li, K.-J. Kang / Acta Materialia 61 (2013) 385–398

[PAGE 5] no growth of TGO layer is assumed to occur, but instead the system is driven by the CTE mismatch between the TGO layer and the substrate: DaDT = (asub  atgo)DT. Because the specimens are relatively thin (0.35 mm) compared with their hole diameter (1 mm), the system is assumed to be in a plane stress condition. To assemble the complete thermal history, four possible combinations must be considered: (a) the substrate and TGO layer both deform elastically; (b) both deform plastically; (c) the sub- strate remains elastic while the TGO layer is plastic; and (d) vice versa. First, when the substrate and TGO layer both respond elastically, referring to the solution of a hollow cylinder with internal and external pressures under the plane stress condition [33], the stress and strain in the TGO layer and the substrate are given by rhh tgo ¼ p R h ð1Þ rhh sub ¼ p ð2Þ rrr sub ¼ p ð3Þ ehh sub ¼ ur sub R ¼ p 2Gsub ¼ pð1 þ msubÞ Esub ð4Þ Fig. 6. Schematic of derivation procedure of the stresses that develop around a cylindrical model due to thermal expansion or TGO growth: (1) substrate; (2) TGO. Fig. 7. Loading sequence for two typical thermomechanical cycles. F.-X. Li, K.-J. Kang / Acta Materialia 61 (2013) 385–398 389

[PAGE 6] ehh tgo ¼ ur tgo R ¼ pR Etgoh ð5Þ where E, G and m are the Young’s modulus, shear modulus and Poisson’s ratio. And the subscripts sub and tgo, denote the substrate and TGO layer, respectively. The sum of the hoop strains in the TGO layer and the substrate, ehh_t- go + ehh_sub, should be equal to the diﬀerence in strain eT between them in the unconstrained state. eT is DaDT or eg during cooling/reheating or during dwelling at the maxi- mum temperature, respectively. Hence, using Eqs. (4) and (5), p can be related to eT as p ¼ eT 1 þ msub Esub þ R Etgoh  1 ð6Þ Here, depending on the segment of the thermal history (cooling/reheating or dwelling at the maximum tempera- ture), the actual hoop strain occurring during cooling/ reheating and that during dwelling at the maximum tem- perature are diﬀerent from each other. Fig. 8a and b illus- trates the schematics. The actual hoop strain occurring during dwelling at the maximum temperature is the same as that given by Eq. (4), whereas the strain occurring dur- ing cooling/reheating is ea_tgo + ehh_tgo or ea_subehh_sub. Here, ea is the strain increment due to temperature change. The yield conditions for the substrate and TGO layer are given by Eqs. (7) and (8), respectively, according to the Mises yield criterion. ﬃﬃ 2 p 2 ½ðrrr sub  rhh subÞ2 þ r2 hh sub þ r2 rr sub 1 2 ¼ rsub Y ; ð7Þ rhh tgo ¼ rtgo Y ð8Þ Here rsub Y and rtgo Y are the yield strengths of the substrate and TGO, respectively. When the TGO layer is at yield, p is assumed to remain constant instead of being governed by Eq. (6) and, hence, the stresses or strains in the TGO layer or the substrate are kept constant according to Eqs. (1)–(5). However, when a region near the hole on the substrate is at yield, when TGO is elastic, the region undergoing plastic deformation, i.e., that in R 6 r 6 RP (where RP is the radius of the plastic zone) expands with the pressure. Referring to Kaliszky [34], Rp vs. the pressure and Rp vs. ehh_sub are related to each other by Eqs. (9) and (10), respectively: p ¼ 1ﬃﬃ 3 p 1 þ 2 ln Rp R   rsub y ð9Þ ehh sub ¼ ﬃﬃ 3 p 6 ð5  4mÞ Rp R  2  ð1  2mÞ 3 þ 6 ln Rp R     " # esub Y ð10Þ where esub Y ¼ rsub Y Esub. Because the TGO layer is still elastic, by substituting Eq. (9) into Eqs. (1) and (5), the strain and stress in the TGO layer are given by ehh tgo ¼ 2 ﬃﬃ 3 p 3 EsubR Etgoh 1 2 þ ln Rp R     esub Y ð11Þ and rhh tgo ¼ 2 ﬃﬃ 3 p 3 R h 1 þ 2 ln Rp R     rsub Y ð12Þ Since the sum of the hoop strains in the TGO layer and the substrate should be equal to eT, as mentioned above, by substituting Eqs. (4) and (5), Rp can be related to eT as follows; eT esub Y ¼ ﬃﬃ 2 p 6 4 Rp R  2  3 1 2 þ ln Rp R     " # þ 2 ﬃﬃ 3 p 3  EsubR Etgoh 1 2 þ ln Rp R     ð13Þ When the pressure reaches p ¼ rtgo Y h R, according to Eqs. (1) and (8), the TGO layer yields too, and p is assumed to remain constant instead of being governed by Eq. (13). Hence, the stresses or strains occurring due to p in the TGO layer or the substrate are kept constant. Fig. 8. Determination of the strain at the interface due to (a) TGO growth during dwelling at the maximum temperature and (b) thermal expansion during heating or cooling. 390 F.-X. Li, K.-J. Kang / Acta Materialia 61 (2013) 385–398