[PAGE 1] Full length article Fabrication and cooling characteristics of microholes in nickel-based superalloys by femtosecond laser with large parameter-operating window Yanping Yuan a,b,* , Yuhan Gu a,b, Dongfang Li c,**, Kaihu Zhang d, Weina Han e a Institute of Laser Engineering, School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124 China b Key Laboratory of Trans-scale Laser Manufacturing Technology (Beijing University of Technology), Ministry of Education, Beijing 100124 China c State Key Laboratory of Chemistry for NBC Hazards Protection, Beijing 102205, China d Beijing Space Crafts, China Academy of Space Technology, Beijing 100094, China e Laser Micro/Nano-Fabrication Laboratory, School of Mechanical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Nickel-based superalloys Cooling characteristics Femtosecond laser A B S T R A C T Turbine blades in aircraft engines operate under extreme high temperatures, with inlet temperatures reaching up to 2200 K. To reduce the blade temperature and extend service life, film cooling holes are typically designed. However, traditional micro-drilling techniques struggle to meet the high precision demands of modern aircraft engines. Femtosecond laser has emerged as an ideal method for processing film cooling holes due to its ultra-high precision and minimal heat-affected zone. However, the stringent requirements for processing film cooling holes on nickel-based alloys using femtosecond lasers result in a narrow selection range of laser parameters. Furthermore, researching the cooling characteristics of film cooling holes processed by lasers is also crucial in practical applications. In this study, the effects of laser parameters on the taper angle and surface morphology of micro-holes in nickel-based superalloys are investigated. Based on the actual morphology of micro-holes (serves as a film cooling hole) prepared by femtosecond laser, the effects of hole inclination and taper angle on their cooling characteristics are further investigated. The results show that both the surface morphology and taper angle can be effectively controlled by optimizing the process parameters. In micro-holes with well-defined inlet and outlet morphologies, the taper angle ranges from 4◦to 8◦. The cooling efficiency of air film holes with taper angles from 4◦to 8◦is similar, with cooling efficiency at the hole exit reaching up to 98 % and covering the parameters of our actual fabricating. This finding suggests that the process window of femtosecond laser fabricating of air film cooling holes is broadened, offering greater flexibility in selecting laser processing parameters. 1. Introduction Aircraft engines are often regarded as the heart of an airplane, referred to as the “crown jewel” of modern industry and the “flower of industry.” Faced with extreme temperature fluctuations and demanding performance requirements, advanced material science and engineering technologies, such as nickel-based single-crystal superalloys [1] and advanced manufacturing technology [2], are employed to ensure the stability and reliability of engines during high-speed operation. The inlet temperature of the turbine blades in the engine’s hot section can reach as high as 2200 K, approximately 30 % above the melting point of nickel-based superalloys. To effectively reduce the temperature of the alloy blades and prevent overheating, film cooling holes are typically designed on the blade surface [3–5]. These cooling holes introduce a protective film of cooling air, effectively isolating the high-temperature gas stream from directly impacting the blade [6–8]. Traditional me­ chanical machining often struggles to meet the precision requirements of microstructure manufacturing due to tool limitations [9–12]. Although electrical discharge machining is widely used for its high ef­ ficiency and suitability for large-scale industrial production, the recast layer and micro-cracks generated on the workpiece surface may impact the engine’s lifespan [13]. Electrochemical machining can improve processing quality but suffers from relatively low efficiency [14]. Compared to traditional machining methods, femtosecond laser * Corresponding author at: Institute of Laser Engineering, School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124 China. ** Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: ypyuan@bjut.edu.cn (Y. Yuan), dongfang-li@foxmail.com (D. Li). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics and Laser Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optlastec https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2025.113697 Received 21 January 2025; Received in revised form 19 July 2025; Accepted 4 August 2025 Optics & Laser Technology 192 (2025) 113697 Available online 8 August 2025 0030-3992/© 2025 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

[PAGE 2] technology offers unique advantages in the field of micro manufacturing due to its ultra-high intensity, ultra-short pulses, and precision [15–18]. Femtosecond laser machining technology enables highly precise pro­ cessing at the microscale while avoiding thermal conduction and dam­ age, making it an ideal choice for fabricating film cooling holes in aircraft engines [19–21]. However, under improper processing param­ eters, the ideal film cooling holes cannot be successfully fabricated. Therefore, it is essential to carefully control and continuously optimize the parameter ranges in order to achieve successful processing. Dasdk et al. [22] conducted experimental research on femtosecond laser fabricating of nickel-based alloy micro-holes and found that the material processed by femtosecond laser did not exhibit thermal dam­ age. Feng et al. [23] applied femtosecond laser processing to nickel- based superalloys and the experimental results demonstrated the absence of traditional machining defects near the processing area. Zhang et al. [24] observed that high laser power during femtosecond laser processing could induce microstructural changes and lead to the for­ mation of defects such as debris, micro-holes, and micro-cracks. Wang et al. [25] investigated how altering the polarization of the femtosecond laser from linear to circular improved machining quality by reducing irregular defects at micro-hole exits in perforation studies on 718 nickel- based alloys. Chen et al. [26] proposed a femtosecond laser layer-by- layer circumferential drilling method, finding that this approach effec­ tively reduces the taper of micro-holes and enhances their circularity. Zhang et al. [25] developed a method to adjust the processing focal plane, facilitating controlled taper machining of micro-holes, resulting in nearly cylindrical micro-holes with a taper angle of up to 0.8◦on nickel-based alloys. Li et al. [19] employed a two-step helical drilling method with femtosecond lasers, achieving hole wall surfaces with nanoscale roughness. Jiang et al. [27] combined the efficiency of nanosecond laser with the precision of femtosecond laser to fabricate film cooling hole with no recast layers or micro-cracks. However, the stringent requirements for processing film cooling holes on nickel-based alloy by femtosecond lasers result in a narrow selection range of laser parameters. Additionally, in practical applications, research on the cooling characteristics of film cooling holes processed by lasers is essential. This study investigates the effects of different femtosecond laser processing parameters on the taper and surface morphology of micro- holes in nickel-based alloys. It also assesses how the taper of femto­ second laser-drilled micro-holes affects their film cooling effectiveness. The results indicate that when the taper angle of the micro-holes falls within the range of 4◦to 8◦(achievable within most of laser parameters in this study), the cooling efficiency of film cooling holes remains consistent, with efficiencies at the hole exit reaching up to 98 %. This result significantly widens the operational window for femtosecond la­ sers and offers insights for designing and optimizing femtosecond laser- processed film cooling holes in turbine blades for aircraft engines. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Experiments In this study, a nickel-based single-crystal superalloy is selected as the experimental material, with dimensions of 10 mm × 10 mm × 1 mm. Before processing, the samples are cleaned with absolute ethanol and left to air dry naturally. Then the samples are affixed to a computer- controlled nanoscale the five-axis motion system, which is coupled with a laser system. The femtosecond laser (PHAROS, LIGHT CON­ VERSION, LT) with a central wavelength of 1030 nm, a maximum output power of 20 W, and a repetition rate of 1 kHz to 500 kHz is used in our experiments. The laser beam is guided through optical elements such as a half-wave plate, polarizer, and planar mirrors, and then introduced into the galvanometer scanning system, where it is focused onto the sample surface by the focusing lens in the scanning system. The five-axis motion system allows multi-dimensional movement of the workpiece, enabling efficient and precise femtosecond laser micro-hole processing. After processing, the samples are immersed in anhydrous ethanol for cleaning and undergo ultrasonic treatment. Scanning elec­ tron microscopy is utilized to observe the morphology of the micro- holes. 2.2. Simulation In order to evaluate the cooling characteristics of the micro-holes, numerical simulation of their cooling efficiency is essential. Fig. 1 il­ lustrates the schematic of the micro-hole plate computational model for film cooling. The film cooling computational model consists of three main components: the high-temperature mainflow channel, the cooling gas channel, and the film micro-holes. The dimensions of the mainflow channel are set to 45D × 10D × 3D; the geometric dimensions of the cooling gas channel are 6D × 6D × 3D; the distance from the main flow channel inlet to the center of the film hole is 10D; and the diameter of Fig. 1. Computational model of the film-cooled micro-hole plate. Table 1 Boundary Condition Parameters. Parameters Range Mainstream velocity ν∞(m/s) 20 Mainstream temperature T∞(K) 300 Mainstream turbulence intensity 5 % Cooling airflow temperature Tj(K) 250 Exit pressure (Pa) 101,325 blowing ratio M 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 Density ratio DR 1.2 Orifice diameter of the air film hole D (μm) 300 Y. Yuan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 192 (2025) 113697 2

[PAGE 3] the microhole is D = 300 μm. The film hole structure includes both circular and conical holes. In this study, the simulations utilize a segregated implicit solver with the Realizable k-ε turbulence model, applying wall functions for enhanced treatment in the near-wall region. Pressure-velocity coupling is calculated using the SIMPLE algorithm, while the convection terms employ a second-order upwind scheme to improve stability, controllability, and computational accuracy. Convergence criteria are set, including reducing the energy residuals to below 10-6 and ensuring that residuals for other parameters are below 10-5, to guarantee a stable residual curve. Boundary condition parame­ ters are detailed in Table 1. The inlet of the cooling airflow is set as a mass flow inlet, determined based on the blowing ratio (M) and density ratio (DR). The specific blowing ratio for this numerical simulation sets at 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5. The mass flux ratio, commonly referred to as the blowing ratio M. The density ratio DR is the ratio of the density of the cooling air jet in turbine blade film cooling to the main flow density. For the mainstream flow region, periodic conditions are applied to the boundaries on both sides along the flow direction. The bottom boundary is treated as an adiabatic wall, while the other boundaries are set as no- slip wall boundaries. The fluid is assumed to be an incompressible ideal gas, and the density ratio is set by adjusting the temperature difference between the mainstream and cooling flows. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Effects of laser parameters on micro-holes Research indicates that laser processing using different filling methods significantly affects the quality of micro-holes. Commonly used processing strategies include concentric circular filling scanning, Z- shaped filling scanning, and bow-shaped filling scanning in femtosecond laser micro-hole fabrication. In this study, the scanning path diagrams are illustrated in Fig. 2(a-c). At a repetition rate of 100 kHz, laser power of 8 W, scanning speed of 100 mm/s, and feed rate of 2 μm, the effects of scanning paths on the morphology of micro-hole entrances and exits are shown in Fig. 2(d-i). In concentric circular scanning, the laser scans along a circular path with consistent spacing. This inward filling pro­ cessing method allows for uniform material removal, effectively Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of scanning paths and SEM images of micro-holes fabricated with different scanning paths: (a,d,e) concentric circular fill scanning; (b,f,g) z-shaped scanning; (c,h,i) bow-shaped scanning. Fig. 3. Entrance and exit morphology of micro-holes at different laser powers: (a) 2 W; (b) 4 W; (c) 6 W; (d) 8 W; (e) 10 W. Y. Yuan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 192 (2025) 113697 3

[PAGE 4] reducing debris accumulation and defect formation. The entrance diameter, exit diameter, and taper angle of the micro-holes are 350.56 μm, 265.50 μm, and 4.87◦, respectively. For Z-shaped scanning, the entrance diameter, exit diameter, and taper angle of the micro-holes are 348.58 μm, 259.43 μm, and 5.10◦, respectively. Similarly, the micro- holes produced by bow-shaped scanning exhibit entrance diameter, exit diameter, and taper angle values of 349.38 μm, 257.62 μm, and 5.25◦, respectively. Additionally, micro-holes fabricated using Z-shaped and bow-shaped scanning show sawtooth defects and uneven material removal. This is attributed to the frequent changes in scanning direction along the Z-shaped and bow-shaped paths, leading to deteriorated exit morphology, decreased roundness, and the formation of sawtooth de­ fects. Therefore, considering both morphology and taper angle, concentric circular scanning demonstrates superior control over micro- hole morphology and defects. In addition to scanning strategies, laser processing parameters such as laser power, feed rate, repetition frequency, and scanning speed also play a crucial role in the morphology and quality of micro-hole fabri­ cation. As shown in Fig. 3, the entrance and exit morphology of micro- holes in nickel-based superalloys is studied under different laser power at a repetition frequency of 100 kHz, scanning speed of 100 mm/s, and feed rate of 2 μm. At a laser power of 2 W, the entrance and exit di­ ameters of the micro-holes are approximately 352.5 μm and 194.1 μm, respectively. The entrance of the micro-hole exhibits a neat and circular morphology with high roundness and no significant defects. However, the exit diameter is smaller, and its morphology shows sawtooth defects. This is attributed to insufficient material removal at lower laser power, leading to irregular exit morphology. As laser power increases, the recast layer at the entrance of the micro-hole becomes more pro­ nounced, while the roundness of the micro-hole cross-section remains good. Additionally, the exit morphology improves significantly, with the diameter increasing from approximately 194.1 μm to 277.2 μm, and the roundness also shows improvement. When the laser power increases, the material absorbs more energy, leading to an enhanced material removal rate. This results in larger entrance and exit diameters as power in­ creases. Moreover, the increase in laser power accelerates the axial en­ ergy transfer. This not only reduces the ablation time at the entrance of the micro-hole but also extends the laser’s action time at the exit. As a result, the exit morphology of the micro-hole is significantly improved. During the laser processing, scanning speed directly affects the ma­ terial processing efficiency, making it crucial to study its impact on the geometric dimensions and morphology of micro-holes. At a repetition frequency of 100 kHz, laser power of 8 W, and a feed rate of 2 μm, the entrance and exit morphologies of micro-holes at different scanning speeds are shown in Fig. 4. At scanning speeds of 50 mm/s and 100 mm/ s, the entrance and exit diameters of the micro-holes are approximately 377 μm and 372.5 μm, and 272 μm and 267.5 μm, respectively. Furthermore, the morphology of the micro-holes exhibits no significant defects and has clear boundaries. This is attributed to a high overlap rate of the laser spots, which ensures sufficient energy deposition for effec­ tive ablation. However, at speeds exceeding 100 mm/s, the exit diam­ eter of the micro-holes gradually decreases, accompanied by the formation of sawtooth defects. The increase of scanning speed leads to the decrease of interaction time between the laser and the material, leading to reduced heat accumulation. This, in turn, affects the material ablation on the inner walls of the micro-holes, particularly at the exit. Additionally, when the scanning speed surpasses 100 mm/s, noticeable defects appear at the exit of the micro-holes. This is due to the deviation between the actual position of the laser beam on the material surface and the intended position, which is particularly pronounced at the Fig. 4. Entrance and exit morphology of micro-holes at different scanning speeds: (a) 50 mm/s; (b) 100 mm/s; (c) 200 mm/s; (d) 300 mm/s; (e) 400 mm/s. Fig. 5. Entrance and exit morphology of micro-holes at different repetition rates: (a) 25 kHz; (b) 50 kHz; (c) 100 kHz; (d) 150 kHz; (e) 200 kHz. Y. Yuan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 192 (2025) 113697 4

[PAGE 5] starting and ending points of the micro-holes at high scanning speeds. During laser processing, the repetition frequency significantly im­ pacts the quality of micro-hole fabrication. At a laser power of 8 W, scanning speed of 100 mm/s, and a feed rate of 2 μm, the influence of different repetition frequencies on the morphology of micro-holes in nickel-based superalloys is shown in Fig. 5. At a repetition frequency of 25 kHz, the micro-holes exhibit noticeable defects and poor roundness. This is due to the longer interval between laser pulses at low repetition frequencies, which reduces energy deposition on the material surface and decreases the material removal rate. As the repetition frequency increases, the material removal rate improves, and the exit morphology of the micro-holes gradually approaches a more perfect circular shape. In terms of micro-hole dimensions, the repetition frequency has a minor effect on the exit diameter, which remains between approximately 348 μm and 360 μm. In contrast, the entrance diameter of the micro-holes increases from 155 μm to 271.3 μm. When the repetition frequency is 25 kHz, the exit diameter is small, with a large taper. As the repetition frequency rises to 100 kHz, both the exit diameter and roundness of the micro-holes significantly improve. This enhancement is attributed to the increased accumulation of pulse energy at higher repetition frequencies, leading to more effective material removal. When the repetition fre­ quency exceeds 100 kHz, the changes in the entrance and exit diameter sizes of the micro-holes shows minimal variation, with the exit diameter approximately 359 μm and the entrance diameter around 270 μm. The taper angle also shows little variation, remaining around 5◦. This is because, at higher repetition frequencies, material removal is more thorough, but it exacerbates thermal accumulation effects within the material. This thermal accumulation can lead to the formation of sig­ nificant amounts of re-melted material and micro-crack defects around the entrance of the micro-hole. Therefore, selecting the appropriate repetition frequency requires balancing the improvement of processing precision with the control of thermal accumulation effects. By moving the focus downwards, the laser can more effectively ablate and remove material, facilitating the fabrication of a uniform and structured micro-hole. The feed rate refers to the distance the laser focus moves downward during the processing. Hence, in micro-hole process­ ing, precise control of the feed rate is vital for fine-tuning the taper and overall fabrication quality. At a repetition rate of 100 kHz, a laser power of 8 W, and a scanning speed of 100 mm/s, the entrance and exit mor­ phologies of micro-holes processed at different feed rates (2 μm, 4 μm, 8 μm, 12 μm, 16 μm) are shown in Fig. 6. At a feed rate of 2 μm, the circularity of the micro-hole exit is good, with the diameters of the entrance and exit of the micro-hole approximately 366.5 μm and 264.4 μm, respectively. When the feed rate exceeds 2 μm, the morphology of the micro-hole entrance remains satisfactory. However, the taper of the micro-holes decreases significantly, and the exit shape gradually changes to an elliptical shape with a reduced diameter. Especially when the feed rate reaches 16 μm, the exit morphology of the micro-holes exhibits irreparable defects. This is due to the excessive speed of the laser focus movement at higher feed rates, leading to uneven material removal. In general, laser processing parameters have a significant impact on the morphology and taper of micro-holes. The effects of laser processing parameters on the taper of micro-holes are shown in Fig. 7. In micro- Fig. 6. The entrance and exit morphology of micro-holes fabricated at different feed rates: (a) 2 μm; (b) 4 μm; (c) 8 μm; (d) 12 μm; (e) 16 μm. Fig. 7. Effects of processing parameters on micro-hole taper angle. Y. Yuan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 192 (2025) 113697 5

[PAGE 6] holes with well-defined inlet and outlet morphologies, the variations in size and taper angle are as follows: 1) the inlet size of the micro-holes ranges from 355 μm to 375 μm; 2) the outlet diameter of the micro- holes is approximately 226 μm to 275.4 μm; 3) with increasing laser power and repetition rate, the taper angle generally decreases, main­ taining a range of 4◦-8◦; 4) as the scanning speed and feed rate increase, the taper angle tends to increase, within the range of 6◦-8◦; 5) the optimal processing parameters are 10 W, 100 kHz, 100 mm/s, and 2 μm. 3.2. Potential applications and cooling characteristics of micro-holes Micro-holes play a vital role in aerospace engineering, particularly in film cooling systems crucial for applications in aviation engines. Civil aircraft engines, boasting a thrust-to-weight ratio of 10, operate at pre- turbine gas temperatures around 1900 K. In contrast, fighter aircraft engines, with higher thrust-to-weight ratios of 15–––20, can surpass 2300 K, exceeding the melting points of turbine blade alloys. To ensure optimal operation of turbine blades in high-temperature environments, the use of film cooling technology is imperative. Film cooling technology involves the fabrication of film cooling holes, ranging from 200 μm to 800 μm in diameter, on nickel-based high-temperature alloy blades in engines. During engine operation, airflow through these holes creates a protective air layer on the blade surface, effectively insulating high- temperature gases and reducing overall temperatures. Due to the com­ plex curved surfaces of aircraft engine blades and the need for tailored film cooling solutions to accommodate various angles, film cooling holes with inclinations of 30◦, 45◦, and 60◦are fabricated using optimized parameters (10 W laser power, 100 kHz repetition rate, 100 mm/s scanning speed, 2 μm feed rate) by femtosecond laser, as shown in Fig. 8. The morphology of the inclined holes is characterized using scanning Fig. 8. Morphology of film cooling micro-holes at different angles: (b) 30◦; (b) 45◦; (c) 60◦. Fig. 9. Central cross-sectional temperature distributions of micro-holes: (a) 30◦; (b) 45◦; (c) 60◦. Y. Yuan et al. Optics and Laser Technology 192 (2025) 113697 6