[PAGE 1] 1 Femtosecond Laser Writing of Spin Defects in Hexagonal Boron Nitride Xingyu Gao,† Siddhant Pandey,† Mehran Kianinia,‡,¶ Jonghoon Ahn,§ Peng Ju,† Igor Aharonovich,‡,¶ Niranjan Shivaram,∗,†, ǁ and Tongcang Li∗,†,§,⊥,ǁ †Department of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA ‡School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, New South Wales 2007, Australia ¶ARC Centre of Excellence for Transformative Meta-Optical Systems (TMOS), University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, New South Wales 2007, Australia §School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA ǁPurdue Quantum Science and Engineering Institute, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA ⊥Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA ∗E-mail: niranjan@purdue.edu; tcli@purdue.edu Abstract Optically active spin defects in wide-bandgap materials have many potential applications in quantum information and quantum sensing. Spin defects in two- dimensional layered van der Waals materials are just emerging to be investigated. Here we demonstrate that optically-addressable spin ensembles in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) can be generated by femtosecond laser irradiation. We observe optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) of hBN spin defects created by laser irradiation. We show that the creation of spin defects in hBN is strongly affected by the pulse energy of the femtosecond laser. When the laser pulse number is less than

[PAGE 2] 2 a few thousand, the pulse number only affects the density of defects but not the type of defects. With proper laser parameters, spin defects can be generated with a high probability of success. Our work provides a convenient way to create spin defects in hBN by femtosecond laser writing, which shows promising prospects for quantum technologies. Keywords: Spin defects, laser writing, hexagonal boron nitride, van der Waals materials, boron vacancy centers Electron and nuclear spins in solid-state materials offer promising platforms for studying quantum spintronics, and have many applications in quantum sensing and other quantum information technologies.1–9 The leading candidates such as nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond exhibit room-temperature, spin-dependent photon emission that facilitates initialization and readout of spins.10,11 Inspired by the breakthrough in graphene and other van der Waals materials, a long-sought goal in the field had been to create similar spin qubits in van der Waals materials that can be initialized and read out optically. 12–18 In this context, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is important as it has a wide bandgap19 and can host high-quality emitters.20–22 Single-photon emissions above 800 K have been observed with quantum emitters in hBN.23 Such emitters are widely studied over the past few years due to their outstanding optical properties. They display a high purity of emission, ultrabright count rates, and large stark-shift tuning at room temperature.24-29 Recent discoveries of negatively charged boron vacancy (VB −) spin defects in hBN gained broad interest as they display spin-dependent photon emission at room temperature.15,16 The VB − defect consists of a missing boron atom and an extra electron in the hBN crystal. It has been created by high-dose neutron irradiation from a nuclear plant and ion implantation.15,16 While a few recent works have created defects with a femtosecond laser,30,31 no spin defects have been observed with laser irradiated hBN samples so far. Here we report the generation of VB − defects in hBN using femtosecond laser writing. The creation process is controllable by tuning the laser parameters. With a proper energy of

[PAGE 3] 3 each femotosecond laser pulse and a wide-range of pulse numbers, we can create VB − defects with the same emission spectrum as the ones created by neutron and ion implantation.15,16 Furthermore, the defects generated by laser irradiation exhibit good contrast in optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) measurements. Compared with neutron and ion implantation methods,15,16 our laser irradiation approach is simpler and more flexible as it can be conducted at an ambient environment with no vacuum requirement.30,32–34 Our work provides a new way to create controllable spin defects in hBN for spin-based quantum technologies. Figure 1 shows the schematic diagrams of the laser writing process and our confocal system for characterizing samples. Laser writing is done using an 800 nm Ti: Sapphire femtosecond laser with a 50 fs pulse duration and a 1 kHz pulse repetition rate. The Ti: Sapphire femtosecond laser consists of a Coherent Vitara Laser for seeding and a Coherent Elite Duo HE+ amplifier that can generate pulses with a maximum single- pulse energy of 13 mJ. The laser pulse is linearly polarized. It is focused on the hBN sample with an infinity-corrected 50x objective lens with NA = 0.8, which is used to simultaneously image the surface of the hBN sample. The number of pulses incident on the sample is controlled using an optical shutter. The hBN flakes are tape-exfoliated and transferred onto a glass coverslip for laser irradiation. The hBN sample is first placed in the laser focus within the Rayleigh range by monitoring the laser ablation of the hBN surface. The hBN surface is oriented normal to the direction of the laser beam to maintain its position along the laser propagation direction during scanning. For creating defects, the sample is moved 4 µm away from the focus, where the beam waist at the hBN surface is about 3 µm. The high-energy laser pulse breaks chemical bonds in hBN due to multiphoton absorption and creates defects. After laser irradiation, the samples are moved to our home-built confocal system (Figure 1d) for further characterization, which includes photoluminescence (PL) and

[PAGE 4] 4 ODMR measurements. To investigate the effects of laser parameters on defect generation, we pattern a group of spots. Each spot is irradiated by the femtosecond laser with a different combination of single-pulse energy and total pulse number. The high- energy pulses cause ablation at the center of the laser beam and leave a hole at each laser-written spot (Figure 1c). Because the ablation process is highly nonlinear, the effect of the energy of each 50 fs pulse is very different from the effect of the total energy of many pulses separated by 1 ms. We carry out a series of measurements to characterize the irradiated spots. We find that within a certain range of pulse energies and pulse numbers of the laser, the spin defects can be generated with a very high probability of success. As shown in Figure 2, at the region irradiated by 20 repetitions of 1 µJ pulses, we observe bright and widely distributed VB − defects at the edge of the ablated hole. The confocal image (Figure 2a) of this spot exhibits strong PL emission around the hole. All bright regions in the confocal image have similar emission spectra centered around 820 nm. Fig. 2c shows typical spectra at three different positions (E1, E2, E3) marked in Fig. 2a. The spectra agree with those of spin defects generated by neutron and ion implantation,15,16 showing a high probability of creating VB − defects. In addition, as shown in Fig. 2d, the emitters display good photostability under a 5 mW 532 nm laser excitation over a period of 1000 s. These hBN defects are stable for several months in storage at room temperature. To further confirm that we have created VB − spin defects in hBN by laser irradiation, we perform ODMR measurements of these defects (Fig. 2b). As reported in previous works, the resonant frequencies of the ODMR spectra of VB − spin defects are given by 𝑓± = 𝐷𝑔𝑠± √𝐸2 + ( 𝑔𝜇𝐵𝐵 ℎ) 2 , where 𝐷𝑔𝑠 = 3.46 GHz and E = 50 MHz are the zero-field splitting parameters of the triplet ground state of VB − defects.15,16 B is the external

[PAGE 5] 5 magnetic field, g is the Landé factor, µB is the Bohr magneton, and h is the Planck constant. To perform the continuous-wave (CW) ODMR measurement, we place a coplanar waveguide close to the laser-irradiated area to apply the microwave. Meanwhile, the sample is excited by a low-power CW 532 nm laser. The emitted photons are counted when the microwave frequency is swept from 3.15 GHz to 3.75 GHz. No external magnetic field is applied. The measured photon counts have two dips at 3.42 GHz and 3.52 GHz, consistent with former ODMR results of VB − defects.15,16 It is noted that the contrast of our measured ODMR can exceed 1 % (Fig. 2b), which is higher than the reported ODMR results of VB − defects in hBN so far.15,16 These show promising spin- optical properties of VB − defects created by femtosecond laser writing. To gain more insight on the formation of VB − defects, we pattern a group of laser- writing spots with various pulse energies Es (Figure 3). The energy of each femtosecond pulse is varied from 200 nJ to 1.5 µJ while the pulse number is fixed at 20. The distance between the laser focus and the surface of the hBN flake is 4 µm. A confocal scan followed by the PL emission spectrum measurement is carried out for each spot. Figure 3a shows four typical confocal images of spots created with different pulse energies. In Figure 3b, we compare their PL emission spectra. With different irradiation pulse energies, the intensity and spectrum of PL emission from the resulting spots vary significantly. For low pulse energies (Es ≤ 400 nJ), the PL intensities are very low for most parts of confocal images, indicating the low densities of optically-active defects. Besides, the emission spectra of the bright spots are always shorter than 750 nm, indicating that a different type of defect is created instead of VB − spin defects. As the pulse energy increases, the PL intensity increases while the emission spectrum changes as well. At 600 nJ, the emission spectrum varies dramatically at different positions. In this pulse energy region, different emission spectra are observed, including both VB − spin defects and other defects. An example emission spectrum for Es = 600 nJ is shown in

[PAGE 6] 6 Figure 3b. Such emitters with different emission spectra generated by low-energy pulses have no spin signal in the ODMR measurement (Figure 3c). The origin of these different types of emitters is still unknown, but it is out of the scope of this work. The VB − spin defects, which are our main focus, are observed from the sites exposed to pulses with Es ≥ 800 nJ. For defects created by the four different high-energy pulses (800 nJ, 1 µJ, 1.25 µJ and 1.5 µJ), the emission spectra are centered around 820 nm (Fig. 3b) and the ODMR measurements have spin signals (Fig. 3c), which confirm the successful generation of VB − defects. Especially, at 1 µJ and 1.25 µJ, we have the highest probability of success to create VB − defects. To get a more general conclusion on the relation between the generation of spin defects, pulse energy, and distance from the laser focus to the sample, we do the laser irradiation on another hBN flake sample with different distances and pulse energies (Fig. 4). In Fig. 4(b), a 2D histogram is plotted to show the dependence of total photon counts from spin defects on the laser pulse energy and the distance between the laser focus and hBN flake. The photon counts are obtained by spectrally and spatially integrating the PL intensity from the confocal scan. For each confocal scan, a 13 𝜇𝑚 × 13 𝜇𝑚 area is selected to include the whole region of the hole and the surrounding area. We use an 800 nm longpass filter to block the photons coming from other types of defects. The highest count rate is obtained by using 1 𝜇J laser pulses with the focus 4 𝜇m away from the sample. In the high pulse energy regions (≥ 600 nJ), the total counts first increase when we move the laser focus away from the sample’s surface and then decreases after reaching maxima (4 𝜇𝑚 for 1 𝜇J and 800 nJ, 3 μm for 600 nJ). This is due to the competing effects of an increased irradiation area and a reduced peak laser intensity. In the low pulse energy regions (≥ 400 nJ), the counts keep decreasing when we increase the distance between the laser focus and the sample. In this region, even if