[PAGE 1] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 990–998 Available online 1 July 2023 1526-6125/© 2023 The Society of Manufacturing Engineers. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Femtosecond laser drilling of film cooling holes: Quantitative analysis and real-time monitoring Tao Sun, Zhengjie Fan *, Xiaomao Sun, Yichun Ji, Wanqin Zhao, Jianlei Cui, Xuesong Mei * School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing System Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710054, China Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robots, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Real-time monitoring Femtosecond laser Machine learning Film cooling holes Drilling stage A B S T R A C T The damage to opposite wall caused by excessive ablation will severely affect the performance of the turbine blade in femtosecond laser drilling of film cooling holes. Real-time monitoring and control of drilling stage is regarded as one of the most effective methods for solving the excessive ablation problem. However, due to the complexity of femtosecond laser drilling process, it is difficult to model the relationship between drilling state and machining phenomenon physically. In this paper, the quantitative analysis of femtosecond laser drilling and an intelligent methodology for real-time monitoring and control of drilling stage were developed. The laser drilling was comprehensively analyzed and four drilling stage was firstly divided automatically based on the hole evolution process and the optical emission signal detected in drilling process. And the correlation between signal and drilling stages was established through the analysis of the optical emission signal. Furthermore, this paper proposed a data-driven method to build the classification model of different drilling stages. The periodicity and pulse characteristics of signal and corresponding time-domain features were extracted for further modelling. Finally, the classification model was established via AdaBoost method, which achieves a classification accuracy of 95.22 %. And the generalization performance for real-monitoring of drilling stage was further verified. This study presented a set of processes for real-time monitoring and process control in laser drilling process, which provides a new insight to solve the excessive ablation problem. 1. Introduction The higher turbine rotor inlet temperature often indicates the better performance of gas-turbine engine, which partly depends on the oper­ ating temperature of turbine blades [1,2]. However, the gas temperature within the advanced turbines is always higher than the melting tem­ peratures of the superalloys which are widely used in turbine blades [3]. In recent years, the two key technologies, thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) [4] and film cooling holes (FCHs) [5], have been developed for enhancing the high temperature performance of superalloys. Thus, the manufacture of FCHs for turbine blades with TBCs has become one of the main development trends of machining FCHs [6,7]. Compared to other manufacturing technology, laser drilling is regarded as the most suitable technique for producing FCHs due to its advantages including the ability to drilling FCHs in turbine blades with TBCs at one time and the ability to drilling shaped hole [8,9]. And due to its high drilling quality, femtosecond laser drilling was widely studied for machining FCHs in the past two decades [10,11]. Recent studies have shown that femtosecond laser drilling has significant advantages, including the absence of con­ ventional defects, such as spatter, recast layers, heat-affected zones and microcracks around the laser-machined region between the TBCs and superalloy substrate, and tiny taper [12,13]. Low drilling efficiency [14] and the damage to opposite wall caused by excessive ablation [15] are two key problems that limit the appli­ cation of femtosecond laser drilling of FCHs. Especially, the damage to opposite wall, will directly lead to the scrap of blades [16,17]. As we all known, laser drilling has the feature of contactless machining and the depth range of ablation region is difficult to determine due to the propagation characteristics of Gaussian beam. Hence, excessive ablation is prone to occur when non-through holes are drilled. Furthermore, the internal structure of a turbine blade is approximately a hollow cavity [18]. Once the laser drilling breakthrough a surface wall of the blade, continued ablation by laser may result in the damage to opposite wall, which will severely affect the performance and service life of the blade. * Corresponding authors. E-mail addresses: fanzhengjie@xjtu.edu.cn (Z. Fan), xsmei@xjtu.edu.cn (X. Mei). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Manufacturing Processes journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/manpro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.06.059 Received 15 February 2023; Received in revised form 9 June 2023; Accepted 26 June 2023

[PAGE 2] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 990–998 991 Thus, the problem will potentially result in a damaged blade that must be refurbished or discarded, which limits the application of femtosecond laser drilling of FCHs. One primary with excessive ablation is that the ablation depth range of laser drilling is difficult to control. Filling the cavity with barrier materials [19,20] and real-time monitoring and control of laser drilling process [21,22] are widely used to solving the problem of excessive ablation. And among them, the ablation depth range can be well controlled by real-time monitoring and controlling laser drilling process, which is regard as one of the most effective methods for solving excessive ablation. Nevertheless, it is difficult to build physical model for femtosecond laser drilling due to the complexity of drilling process [23], resulting in the difficulty of real-time monitoring and control drilling process. In the past several decades, machine learning methods have played a vital role in monitoring and modelling, which has been widely adopted in the field of real-time monitoring of laser welding [24], additive manufacturing [25] and laser subtractive manufacturing [26,27]. Wang et al. proposed an online visual monitoring method for evaluating laser keyhole weld­ ing penetration in welding process based imaging process method and deep belief network (DBN) [28]. Terry et al. reported an active moni­ toring method for classifying faulty and nominal sites in powder bed fusion processes via shallow artificial neural net (ANN) [29]. Besides, a lot of studies have shown the advantages and potential of machine learning methods applied to machining process monitoring [30,31]. However, the study on data-driven modelling has been a largely under explored domain in femtosecond laser drilling. Most studies mainly apply empirical model to realize the monitoring and control of the drilling process. Song et al. proposed a spectral response guided femtosecond laser bone drilling method. Results show that the thermal damage can be detected based on the spectral intensity ratio of red signal and other visible signal and the accelerated removal of hydroxyapatite with can be found based on the spectral intensity ratio of green and white signal in femtosecond laser bone drilling, which can be applied to optimize the key laser parameters [32]. Xie et al. systematically analyzed the relationship between material removal, surface structure characteristics, surface defects and acoustic emission (AE) signals in femtosecond laser modification of silicon carbide. Results indicate that the root mean square and frequency distribution of AE signals can be used to identify the material removal rate and surface defects respec­ tively [33]. All the above studies can realize the real-time monitoring of the machining process. However, the experimental results are mainly qualitative and lack of quantitative models. And the qualitative results are mainly applied to optimize rather than control the process. As far as we know, no previous research has investigated the application of ma­ chine learning methods for the above problem. Thus, in order to achieve better understand and control the drilling process, it's quite necessary to perform a comprehensive study concerning quantitative analysis and real-time monitoring of drilling process. In this paper, the quantitative analysis of femtosecond laser drilling of FCHs and an intelligent methodology for real-time monitoring and control of drilling stage were developed. The machining characteristics of FCHs by femtosecond laser were systematically investigated and the drilling process was automatically divided into four typical stages: unpenetrated stage (UPS), early penetrated stage (EPS), hole forming stage (HFS) and hole completion stage (HCS) via optical emission signal. Furthermore, the detailed features of different stages and the correlation between the optical emission signal and drilling stages were compre­ hensively analyzed. Finally, a classification model for real-time and control of drilling process was developed by AdaBoost method. Experi­ mental results demonstrated the minor deviation between the predicted Fig. 1. Schematic of the experimental setup. (a) Schematic of experimental system and monitoring platform in femtosecond laser drilling; (b) Relative position between the photodiodes and sample; (c) Schematic of laser percussion drilling. Table 1 Material and chemical composition of sample in different layers. Layers Materials Chemical composition TBCs Yttria-stabilized zirconia Element Zr Y O Weight % 61.12 8.37 30.51 Bond coat NiCoCrAlYTa Element Ni Co Cr Al O Ta Weight % 41.71 21.16 16.14 9.05 7.40 4.53 Superalloy GH4169 Nickel-Based Alloy Element Ni Fe Cr Nb Mo Weight % 51.67 20.25 18.14 5.41 0.91 T. Sun et al.

[PAGE 3] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 990–998 992 and the actual drilling stage. 2. Experimental setup The experimental system and monitoring platform for femtosecond laser drilling are shown in Fig. 1(a). A Ti: sapphire femtosecond laser (Spitfire Ace, Spectra-physics Inc.) with a maximum pulse energy of 5 mJ and repetition rate of 1 kHz in 120 fs pulse width and a central wavelength of 800 nm was applied for drilling. And the linearly polar­ ized laser was transformed into circularly laser by λ/4 wave plate and then was delivered to the sample after passed through a lens of 200 mm focal length. The theoretical spot diameter of the gaussian-shape laser on the surface of the sample is around 22.1 μm. The sample is a 1.5 mm thick plate of superalloy coated thermal barrier coatings (TBCs), which was placed on a quadrate chamber, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Table 1 demonstrates detailed information about the material and chemical composition of sample in different layers. In the monitoring platform, a photodiode (SM05PD1A, 350-1100 nm, Thorlabs Inc., Photodiode 1) was placed at the backside of the workpiece to precisely identify the breakthrough stage, which is not available during actual drilling process due to the hollow cavity existed in turbine blades. And another photodiode (SM05PD5A, 800-1700 nm, Thorlabs Inc., Photodiode 2) was aligned under an inclination of 30◦ relative to the optical axis for collecting surface optical emission signal considering detected sensitivity and interference between sensor and laser transmission. The optical emission signals were simultaneous ac­ quired at a sampling rate of 200 kHz. To reduce the interference caused by drilling trajectory, the percussion drilling method was applied, as shown in Fig. (c). The pulse energy is 3 mJ and the focus position is 1 mm under the surface of sample in this experiment. 3. Quantitative analysis of laser drilling process 3.1. Analysis of hole evolution process The most effective method to solve a problem is to understand what caused the problem. Thus, it's very important to explore the hole evolution process in femtosecond laser drilling. As we all known, once the sample was penetrated, there will be some light emitted from the sample bottom, as displayed in Fig. 2(a). And the amplitude of the back optical emission signal collected by photodiode 1 would rapidly in­ crease, which can be used as a flag to distinguish the unpenetrated stage (UPS) and penetrated stage. Besides, as we can observed in Fig. 2(a), the amplitude of the signal fluctuates up and down, and further levelling off. The main reason for signal fluctuation is that back optical emission signal cannot be stable transmitted downward due to very small hole outlet, which can be regarded as early penetrated stage (EPS). With the evolution of the drilling process, the hole outlet gradually expands, and the laser(800 nm) emitted from the outlet gradually stabilizes. Thus, both the hole forming stage (HFS) and hole completion stage (HCS) corresponds to the stable signal. Thus, the drilling process can be pre­ cisely divided into three drilling stage: UPS, EPS and HFS according to the signal. Furthermore, as we all known, the excessive ablation always occurs after the sample has been penetrated in laser drilling. Therefore, the evolution of hole morphology after the sample was penetrated was investigated via the pulses number control. And in order to ensure the same starting point of pulses number control, real-time monitoring and control of drilling process was achieved via photodiode 1. Once the difference value of the back optical signal exceeds a threshold, the laser source would be turned off. The different pulses number would be applied based on the EPS for further drilling. The hole evolution process after EPS as shown in Fig. 2(c). It can be observed that the cross-section morphology of the machined holes is gradually changing from a conical hole to a cylindrical hole. And there is a minor difference in cross-section morphology of the machined holes when the pulses number is up to 5000, which demonstrated the laser drilling process has reached a plateau. Thus, the drilling process after 5000 pulses number can be regarded as HCS. And the surface optical emission signal collected by photodiode 2 can also prove the conclusion. As the increase of drilling time, the hole will become gradually deeper. And the laser energy will also be attenuated due to the plasma shielding and multiple reflection existed in laser drilling, resulting in the reduction of the laser-induced surface optical emission intensity. Furthermore, when the drilling Fig. 2. Optical emission signal and hole evolution process after EPS. (a) Back optical emission acquired in the laser drilling; (b) Surface optical emission acquired in the laser drilling; (c) Cross-section morphology of the machined holes. T. Sun et al.

[PAGE 4] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 990–998 993 stage is in EPS, the hole outlet is very small and most surface optical emission is emitted from the hole inlet. The surface optical emission intensity will be gradually reduced with the expansion of the hole outlet. Thus, the amplitude of the surface optical emission signal gradually decreased over time before HCS. When the drilling stage is in HCS, the hole outlet diameter tends to be stable and the amplitude of the surface optical emission signal also reaches a plateau. Fig. 2(b) shows the evo­ lution process of the surface optical emission signal over time. The time interval between the EPS and the time to reach the plateau is around 5 s, which is consistent with the above experiment. Thus, according to the signal and drilling experiment, the drilling stage can be divided into four stages, as shown in Fig. 3. In UPS, there is mainly surface optical emission in drilling process, but no back optical emission due to the unpenetrated hole. And the surface optical emission declines gradually with the increase of hole depth. As the drilling pro­ gresses, the hole is penetrated. The surface optical emission further Fig. 3. Schematic of hole evolution process. Fig. 4. Automatic division of drilling stage. (a) Four-order difference of the back optical emission signal, where the “Index” on the x-axis refers to the index of data point after the fourth-order difference; (b) Division results of the back optical emission signal based on the four-order difference; (c) Four-order difference of the surface optical emission signal; (d) Relationship between the surface optical emission signal and drilling stage. T. Sun et al.

[PAGE 5] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 990–998 994 declines and a fluctuating back optical emission occurs at EPS. And the initial hole shape is a conical hole. Furthermore, the hole shape gradu­ ally changes from a conical hole to a cylindrical hole and there is strong and stable back optical emission signal at HFS, which indicates the hole is forming. Finally, laser has minor ablation effect on hole, and the amplitude of surface optical emission is close to stable, which means that the drilling process is up to HCS. According to the above analysis, the drilling stage can be defined by the optical emission signal, which pro­ vides the basis for real-time monitoring and control of drilling stage. 3.2. Automatic division of drilling stage According to the above analysis, the back optical emission signal can be used as an indication to distinguish the UPS, EPS and HFS. As mentioned in the manuscript, the back optical emission signal will in­ crease rapidly after the workpiece is penetrated. Thus, the difference of the signal can be applied to distinguish the unpenetrated and penetrated stage. And the fourth-order difference of the signal is verified with highest differentiation after experimental testing. Therefore, the fourth- order difference of the signal was carried out to find the mutation po­ sition considering the signal characteristics in different drilling stage. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the difference value will increase rapidly. Then it goes down and it will reach a stable value subsequently. Thus, the signal can be divided into three parts via setting an appropriate threshold, the divided back optical emission signal is shown in Fig. 4(b). It can be observed that the division basically conforms to the signal characteris­ tics in different drilling stage. Moreover, the HFS and HCS can be divided based on the surface optical emission signal. Similarly, the fourth-order difference is applied to the signal. The signal can also be divided into two parts by setting an appropriate threshold, as shown in Fig. 4(c). Finally, the signal can be automatically divided into four parts, and each part corresponds to different drilling stage. Fig. 4(d) demonstrates the corresponding relationship. 4. Real-monitoring of Drilling process 4.1. Data pre-processing In order to build a high-precision data-driven model, in-depth analysis of the signal is required. And the back optical emission signal cannot be applied and is only as a marker in actual drilling processing due to the cavity. Thus, the in-depth analysis of the surface optical emission signal was developed. It can be observed that the periodic fluctuation existed after amplifying the signal in Fig. 5(b), which may be related to the inherent properties of photodiode due to the same period can be observed in back optical emission signal. Moreover, after further amplifying the signal, the pulse characteristics can be observed in the signal, as shown in Fig. 5(c), which is consistent with the repetition rate of laser source. In this case, the periodic fluctuation existed in signal will affect feature extraction. It can be found that although the overall signal shows a downward trend, a rise and fall pattern is presented by the amplitude of the pulse signal in each period, which leads to the extracted features also showing a same pattern and the reduction of feature dis­ criminability when the data pre-processing is not implemented. And the lower feature discriminability will influence the model accuracy. Therefore, it is necessary to find a way to eliminate the periodic fluctuation. The prerequisite of eliminating the influence of periodic fluctuation is to determine the period of such fluctuation. Thus, autocorrelation analysis is implemented for determining the signal period. Fig. 5(d), (e) shows the autocorrelation analysis result. As we can observed, the short period, whose time interval was 1 ms, is consistent with the repetition rate. And the long period with 270 ms indicated the periodic fluctuations existed in the signal. Considering the data interaction mechanism be­ tween hardware and software in real-time monitoring of drilling stage, the data is uploaded from the data acquisition system to the industrial computer in the form of one-dimensional batch data. A rectangular window with same length as the long period was applied to divided the whole signal and a series of batch data with 25,000 data points was obtained for further processing, which is consistent with data uploading in actual laser drilling. Besides, the valuable information in the signal is the pulse peak due to the pulse characteristics. Therefore, the peak extraction was implemented via second-derivative peak search algo­ rithm [34] and the peak information was reserved, which can reduce the amount of data and speed up calculations. 4.2. Feature extraction For time-series signal, time-domain features can directly reflect the changing trend of the signal with drilling process and different time- domain features can measure signal in different aspects. According to the previous research [35,36], the most common time-domain features include mean value, energy value, root-square value, standard devia­ tion, root-mean-square, peak value, kurtosis, skewness, waveform fac­ tor, peak factor, impulse factor, and margin factor. A batch of surface optical emission signal is defined as x(i). The specific equations are shown in Fig. 5. Signal characteristics of the surface optical emission signal. (a) Surface optical signal acquired in the femtosecond laser drilling process; (b) Periodical fluctuations existed in signal; (c) Pulse characteristics existed in signal; (d), (e) Autocorrelation analysis result of the signal. T. Sun et al.

[PAGE 6] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 990–998 995 Hence, these time-domain features were extracted according to pulse peak for each batch of data. The results of time-domain features extraction are shown in Fig. 6(a). It can be observed that different time- domain features have different varying trends with respect to drilling process, which can reflect the different signal characteristics including attenuation, fluctuation, dispersion degree, and so on. And there are differences in time-domain features at different drilling stage, which is more obvious in three-dimensional features, as shown in Fig. 7. In fact, the conclusion that the separability of features increases with the in­ crease of feature dimension has been proposed and verified [37,38]. Therefore, all the features can be combined into higher-dimensional features to enhance the separability relative to different drilling stage. 4.3. Classification of drilling stage Based on the above time-domain features set, the classification model of drilling stage in the femtosecond laser drilling process can be established via machine learning method. Considering the costs of data Fig. 6. Time-domain features extracted from surface optical emission signal. Fig. 7. Three-dimensional time-domain feature. Table 2 Performance comparison of different machine learning methods. Methods Train accuracy Test accuracy Macro- Precision Macro- Recall Macro- F1 SVM 97.28 % 95.09 % 84.11 % 99.19 % 0.85 DT 95.76 % 93.64 % NaN 99.29 % NaN KNNs 96.56 % 94.58 % 84.25 % 99.34 % 0.85 BT 100 % 95.19 % 85.70 % 99.07 % 0.86 AdaBoost 99.14 % 95.22 % 86.34 % 98.97 % 0.87 MLP 95.96 % 94.64 % 84.91 % 99.77 % 0.85 ⎧ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎨ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ Mean Value : x = 1 N ∑ N i=1 xi Energy Value : xE = ∑ N i=1 x2 i Root-square Value : xr = ( 1 N ∑ N i=1̅̅̅̅̅̅ |xi| √ )2 Standard Value : σx =̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 1 N ∑ N i=1 [xi −x]2 √ √ √ √ Root-mean-square : xrms =̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 1 N ∑ N i=1 x2 i √ √ √ √ Peak Value : xp = max(|xi|) ⎧ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎨ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ Kurtosis : xα = 1 N ∑ N i=1 (xi −x)3 Skewness : xβ = 1 N ∑ N i=1 (xi −x)4 Waveform factor : Wf = xrms x Peak factor : Cf = xp xrms Іmpulse factor : If = xp x Margin factor : Lf = xp xr T. Sun et al.