[PAGE 1] Appl Phys A (2011) 104:713–719 DOI 10.1007/s00339-011-6326-z Femtosecond laser drilling of high-aspect ratio microchannels in glass Xin Zhao · Yung C. Shin Received: 22 October 2010 / Accepted: 25 January 2011 / Published online: 18 February 2011 © Springer-Verlag 2011 Abstract A femtosecond laser is used to fabricate mi- crochannels with high aspect ratios by laser direct ablation. Drilling both in air and in water is investigated. It is found that at low pulse energy, drilling in water can generate chan- nels with high aspect ratios. However, at high pulse energy, water-assisted drilling stops working and only very shallow holes can be obtained. The reason for this is presented. On the contrary, the aspect ratio of holes drilled in air increases signiﬁcantly at high pulse energy. The effects of writing speed and repeated fabrication are also investigated, and an optimum writing speed is determined for ﬁxed laser para- meters. 1 Introduction Ultrashort-pulse lasers provide an effective means for mi- cromachining transparent materials. Usually, some dielec- tric materials, such as glass, are transparent to long wave- length light because their band gaps are much larger than the photon energy of a laser. Therefore, electrons in the valence band cannot be excited by a single photon to the conduction band, and there are not sufﬁcient free electrons to further ab- sorb the laser energy. However, at very high laser intensity, nonlinear absorption can occur. A bonded electron can ab- sorb several photons at the same time, and then get excited to be free. These free electrons can further absorb the laser en- ergy by avalanche ionization. Since an ultrashort laser pulse can generate high enough laser intensity for nonlinear ab- sorption, it can be used to fabricate transparent materials di- rectly. This method has attracted a lot of attention due to its X. Zhao · Y.C. Shin () Center for Laser-based Manufacturing, School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA e-mail: shin@purdue.edu attendant advantages, such as localized heating, fast fabri- cation speed and ability for creating 3D patterns inside the materials. Ultrashort laser pulse based direct fabrication can be used to generate a wide variety of optical components, such as waveguides [1, 2], power splitters [3], couplers [4], and Bragg gratings [5]. It can also fabricate microchannels for micro-ﬂuidic application in micro-total analysis systems (µ-TAS) [6–8]. Microchannels are the key components for µ-TAS and other micro-ﬂuidic devices. It is very useful if one can gen- erate microchannels with high aspect ratios. There are sev- eral methods to fabricate microchannels with a femtosecond laser. In [9, 10], they generated microchannels by irradiat- ing the target with a femtosecond laser, followed by heat treatment and dilute aqueous hydroﬂuoric solution etching. In [11–14], they used laser irradiation and hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) solution etching, without heat treatment, and gener- ated microchannels with a high aspect ratio (50:1) and clear side wall. However, the microchannels fabricated by these methods are not taper-free, and also require a long post- processing time. Therefore, the authors of [15, 16] tried to fabricate the microchannels by direct laser ablation without any post processing. It was shown that drilling from the rear surface could generate deeper holes than drilling from the front surface, because the early plasma formed by drilling from the rear surface is much weaker. Besides, they used distilled water to help reduce the redeposition of ablated ma- terials, and the aspect ratio was signiﬁcantly raised to 50:1. Some other liquids were also tested for this method [17]. They all showed that at low laser intensity, liquid-assisted laser drilling can generate deep holes with small diameters (several µm). In this paper, we present the parametric experimental re- sults of fabricating microchannels with high aspect ratios in glass by a laser direct ablation process in both air and wa-

[PAGE 2] 714 X. Zhao, Y.C. Shin ter at various levels of pulse energy. A qualitative analysis is given to explain why drilling in air and water performs differently in different pulse energy ranges. In addition, the effects of writing speed and repeated fabrication on the qual- ities of microchannels are investigated for drilling both in air and in water. 2 Experimental setup The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1. A regeneratively ampliﬁed Ti:sapphire laser (Spitﬁre, Spectra Physics) was used as the fabrication laser. It can produce 100 fs pulses, the central wavelength is 800 nm, and the repetition rate is 1 kHz. The pulse energy was adjusted from 20 µJ to 230 µJ in the experiment, which was sufﬁciently higher than the ab- lation threshold. The laser beam was focused into an opti- cally polished fused silica glass (Corning 7940) sample by a 10X microscope objective with a numerical aperture of NA = 0.30 and a focal length of f = 8.3 mm. The sample was about 2 mm thick, and could be moved in z direction by a linear motor translation stage. The velocity was set at 10 µm/s and 60 µm/s in the experiment. The sample was drilled either in air or with its rear surface contacted with distilled water. The laser was ﬁrst focused beyond the rear surface of the sample, and then the sample was moved in z direction by the motor stage so that a micro-channel could be fabricated from the rear surface. To in-situ monitor the drilling process, a 4X objective and a CCD camera were combined to take the side-view images during the drilling process. A LED light was used as the light source. After the fabrication, a microscope was used to take top view images of the holes. To verify whether the mi- crochannels were hollow or not, the samples were immersed Fig. 1 Experimental setup for drilling process in water when observing them with the microscope. The hollow and solid parts of a hole could easily be distin- guished in this way because the hollow part ﬁlled with water looked dark under the microscope, while the solid part was bright. 3 Results and discussion 3.1 Effect of pulse energy Figure 2 shows the microchannels drilled in air with differ- ent pulse energies. The writing speed was set to 10 µm/s, and the pulse energy was varied: 20–30–40–50–80–100–120– 160–230 µJ. Figure 2(a) shows the images of channels un- der the microscope, while Fig. 2(b) depicts the resultant hole depth and diameter vs. pulse energy. At low pulse energies, the holes are very shallow because the ablated material will easily cool down and redeposit on the side wall of the hole, blocking the further ablation process. As the pulse energy becomes higher, the depth of hollow hole increases, as ex- pected. At higher pulse energy, the ablated material will gain higher temperature and kinetic energy. Therefore, it does not easily cool down and can escape from a longer hole without redeposition. As the channels become longer (at high pulse energies), the sidewalls of channels become rougher. This is because when the holes become deeper, it is more difﬁcult for the ablated material to escape. They tend to redeposit on the sidewalls of the holes and make them rougher. It can also be seen that at high pulse energies, there are some cracks around the solid parts of the microchannels. They are caused by the stress induced by the laser pulses. When the laser pulses irradiate on the solid parts of the channels, the mate- rial is heated to a very high temperature, but cannot escape. Therefore, a strong stress will be generated. At high energy, the stress will be strong enough to break the material around and form cracks. Next, holes were drilled with the sample immersed in water and the results are shown in Fig. 3. All the parame- ters are the same as the case in air. At low pulse energy (lower than 80 µJ per pulse) as demonstrated by previous work [15, 16], uniform holes could be fabricated with high aspect ratios and clean side walls. The depths of the holes are much larger than the ones drilled in air for the same pulse energy and they also increase with the pulse energy. This is because water can reduce the redeposition of the ablated debris and oxidation, which is critical for the fabrication of deep holes [17]. However, at high pulse energy (higher than 100 µJ per pulse), the depths of holes rapidly decrease with pulse energy and reach a minimum value of about 50 µm, after which they remain of constant value during the further increase of pulse energy.

[PAGE 3] Femtosecond laser drilling of high-aspect ratio microchannels in glass 715 Fig. 2 Microchannels drilled from the rear surface in air with different pulse energies. Writing speed: 10 µm/s, pulse energy: 20–30–40–50–80–100–120–160– 230 µJ. (a) Microscope images. (b) Depth and diameter vs. pulse energy Fig. 3 Microchannels drilled from the rear surface in water with different pulse energies. Writing speed: 10 µm/s; pulse energy: 20–30–40–50–80–100– 120–160–230 µJ. (a) Microscope images. (b) Depth and diameter vs. pulse energy This unusual phenomenon reveals that at high pulse en- ergy, the water-assisted fabrication will not help increase the depth of the hole anymore; instead, the holes become very shallow. On the contrary, in this range, direct drilling in air is able to generate holes with high aspect ratios. In [18], it is reported that the laser ablation rate of silicon in water would saturate at high pulse energy due to plasma genera- tion near the water–silicon interface. However, they could not explain why ablation would be terminated at the very early stage. There are two possible reasons for this phenom- enon. First, at high pulse energy, the diameter of the hole becomes larger. Since the water ﬂow into the channel is pri-

[PAGE 4] 716 X. Zhao, Y.C. Shin Fig. 4 CCD images of plasma during drilling process in air. Pulse energy: 160 µJ, writing speed: 10 µm/s marily by the capillary effect, it is harder for water to ﬂow into the deep inside of the larger diameter hole. However, in our results, the depth of the hole is much smaller than the depth that water can ﬂow into, and thus it is conceivable the diameter of the hole is not the only main reason for this phenomenon. The second possible reason is that high pulse energy will generate strong plasma near the water-glass in- terface. When the target absorbs laser energy, electrons near the surface will be overheated and ejected from the surface in a very short time (∼fs). They will subsequently ionize the ambient air or liquid to form strong plasma, which is so-called early plasma [19, 20]. This plasma will impede the expansion of plume plasma (ablated material) later [17]. The advantage of drilling from the rear surface is that the generated early plasma will be much weaker than that for drilling from the front surface. Therefore, it is easier for ab- lated material to escape from the hole. However, for the case of drilling in water, when the pulse energy becomes higher, more electrons of the sample will be overheated and ejected out of the sample. Since the ionization threshold of water is much lower than that of air, water will be easily ionized by ejected electrons and the incident laser, forming a strong early plasma at the water–glass interface. Since the water will conﬁne the expansion of this hot dense plasma, it will work as a block between water and ablated material. It will stop water from ﬂowing into the hole, as well as impede the expansion of ablated material from the inside. As a result, only a very shallow hole can be fabricated. It can be seen that the sidewalls of holes drilled in wa- ter are smoother than those drilled in air. This is because the water can reduce the redeposition of the ablated mater- ial. Even when the holes are very deep, they are still quite smooth. Similar to the holes drilled in air, there are also cracks around the solid parts of channels, because of the stress induced by laser pulses. To validate our analysis, we monitored the drilling process in-situ with a CCD camera. We set the pulse en- ergy to be high (160 µJ) and the writing speed at 10 µm/s, and measured the plasma behaviour while drilling in both air and water. The results for drilling in air and water are shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. For drilling in air, one can clearly see the ejected materials from the sample: it can be either bright (in (b)) or dark (in (c)). An interesting grown tail is seen from (d)–(f). This tail would stay at the entrance of the hole. There are two possible reasons for the generation of this tail: (1) When the hole is too deep, ablated materials will solidify before escaping from the hole and form a tail at the exit; (2) The surface materials can be probably melted and then resolidiﬁed to form the tail. For drilling in water, one can see that the laser can ion- ize the water before ablation of glass (Fig. 5(a)). From Figs. 5(b)–(f), we do not see the ejected material as we do in Fig. 4. This is because the water can cool down and disperse the material. At the target surface, we can see that there is a sphere-shaped strong plasma conﬁned there. This plasma can stay there and last until the laser is focused deep inside the material, because the water will restrict the plasma ex-

[PAGE 5] Femtosecond laser drilling of high-aspect ratio microchannels in glass 717 Fig. 5 CCD images of plasma during drilling process in water. Pulse energy: 160 µJ, writing speed: 10 µm/s Fig. 6 Microchannels drilled in air at different writing speeds. Pulse energy: 230 µJ, writing speed: 5–10–20–40–80 µm/s. (a) Microscope images. (b) Depth and diameter vs. writing speed pansion. When the plasma is hot and dense enough (at high pulse energy), it will not be cooled down and dispersed in water quickly. Instead, it will be conﬁned at the entrance of the hole by water and also stop water from entering the hole. That is why at high pulse energy, the depth of the hole sud- denly becomes small and even smaller than when drilled in air. This observation can support our previous analysis. 3.2 Effect of writing speed To study how writing speed affects the qualities of holes, the samples were drilled at different writing speeds both in air and in water. It has been shown in the previous section that drilling in air can work well at high pulse energy, while drilling in water is good for low pulse energy. Therefore, the pulse energy was set at 230 µJ per pulse for drilling in air and at 50 µJ per pulse for drilling in water. The writ- ing speed was set to 5–10–20–40–80 µm/s, respectively. The results for drilling in air and water are shown in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. It can be seen the diameter decreases slowly as writing speed increases for drilling both in air and in water. However, the lengths of the channels reach a maximum value at the writing speed of 10 µm/s. When the writing speed further increases, the lengths of the holes be-

[PAGE 6] 718 X. Zhao, Y.C. Shin Fig. 7 Microchannels drilled in water at different writing speeds. Pulse energy: 50 µJ, writing speed: 5–10–20–40–80 µm/s. (a) Microscope images. (b) Depth and diameter vs. writing speed Fig. 8 Depth and diameter of microchannels drilled in air by repeated fabrication. Pulse energy: 160 µJ, writing speed: 10 µm/s, writing times: 1–2–3 come smaller, while the diameters decrease slowly. There- fore, 10 µm/s seems to be the optimum writing speed for the laser parameters used in this study. 3.3 Effect of repeated fabrication Next experiments were carried out to see whether it would increase the aspect ratios of the holes if the same one is drilled several times. Drilling both in air and in water was investigated. For drilling in air, the pulse energy was set to be 160 µJ and the writing speed was 10 µm/s. The chan- nels were drilled repeatedly 1, 2 and 3 times to see how the aspect ratios changed. As shown in Fig. 8, drilling in air multiple times does not help increase the aspect ratio. With increasing drilling attempts, the diameters of the chan- nels remain unchanged, but the lengths are not increased ei- ther: instead, they seem to decrease a lot, especially for the case of drilling 2 times (nearly 50%). This is because when the hole is drilled for the second time, the solid part of the hole will be ablated. However, since the hole is too long, the ablated material cools down and solidiﬁes on the wall of hollow channel drilled last time. The solidiﬁed material will block the hollow hole and decrease the length of the hole. For drilling in water, the pulse energy was set to be 50 µJ and the writing speed was 10 µm/s. The channels were also drilled 1, 2 and 3 times, respectively. As shown in Fig. 9, drilling multiple times also does not increase the aspect ra- tio, just like the case in air. However, unlike drilling in air, Fig. 9 Depth and diameter of microchannels drilled in water by re- peated fabrication. Pulse energy: 50 µJ, writing speed: 10 µm/s, writing times: 1–2–3 it does not decrease the length of hole too much (only about 13%). This is because when the hole is drilled for the second time in water, the ablated material will disperse into the wa- ter and not easily solidify on the wall of the hole. However, the length of the hole is restricted by the depth that water can ﬂow into. Therefore, even if the hole is drilled several times, the length does not change too much. 4 Conclusion In summary, microchannels with high aspect ratios were fabricated in glass by a femtosecond laser direct abla- tion process, both in air and in water. It is shown that at low pulse energy, water-assisted drilling can generate mi- crochannels with much higher aspect ratios, because it can reduce the redeposition and oxidation of ablated material. However, when the pulse energy is high enough, water- assisted drilling terminates early. The depths of holes de- crease rapidly as pulse energy increases, and drop to about 50 µm. The reason for this phenomenon is that the strong plasma generated near the water-glass interface will conﬁne the ablated material to escape from the hole and stop water from entering into the channel. On the other hand, as the pulse energy increases, the depth of the hole drilled in air increases rapidly, and a high aspect ratio can be achieved in the high pulse energy range. It is found that with the laser pa- rameters used in this study, 10 µm/s is the optimum writing