[PAGE 1] 1 Femtosecond Laser Processing of Germanium: An Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics Study Pengfei Ji and Yuwen Zhang1 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering University of Missouri Columbia, MO 65211, USA Abstract An ab initio molecular dynamics study of femtosecond laser processing of germanium is presented in this paper. The method based on the finite temperature density functional theory is adopted to probe the structural change, thermal motion of the atoms, dynamic property of the velocity autocorrelation, and the vibrational density of states. Starting from a cubic system at room temperature (300 ) containing 64 germanium atoms with an ordered arrangement of 1.132 in each dimension, the femtosecond laser processing is simulated by imposing the Nose Hoover thermostat to the electronic subsystem lasting for ~100  and continuing with microcanonical ensemble simulation of ~200 . The simulation results show solid, liquid and gas phases of germanium under adjusted intensities of the femtosecond laser irradiation. We find the irradiated germanium distinguishes from the usual germanium crystal by analyzing their melting and dynamic properties. Keywords: crystal germanium, ab initio molecular dynamics, femtosecond laser irradiation 1 Corresponding author. Email: zhangyu@missouri.edu

[PAGE 2] 2 Nomenclature c conversion coefficient, /  length of the simulation system in one direction, Å  Boltzmann constant, 1.38 × 10  ⁄ atomic-scale energy, Ha !! ion-ion Coulomb energy, Ha " Fermi-Dirac occupation number femtosecond laser fluence, J/$  % atomic mass, a. u '( number of electrons '! number of ions )" position of the atom * + ionic position vector, Bohr 0 temperature,  1 velocity, 23ℎ5 6. 7. 8 ⁄  potential term in the Hamiltonian, Ha 9" three components of the velocity 1:;7<, 1=;7< and 1>;7<

[PAGE 3] 3 Greek ? electron temperature parameter @ chemical potential, Ha A Hartree potential, Ha B" one-electron eigenstates ℱ electronic free energy, Ha Ω ground potential for an interacting spin Fermi gas, Ha ℋ one electron Hamiltonian F vibrational frequency of atom, G H electron density Subscripts and Superscripts I$ exchange and correlation  electron J ion 13K volume of the modeled system

[PAGE 4] 4 1. Introduction Femtosecond laser processing has been widely used in the fabrication process of cutting-edge semiconductor integrated circuits (ICs) and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS). The photolithography, serving as a conventional approach to fabricate the microstructures, has been a predominant technique since the emergent of semiconductors. However, the traditional photolithography suffers from the drawbacks of high cost and complex treatment for the masks with the miniaturization of structure due to optical diffraction in nanoscale. The femtosecond laser processing (nanolithography), due to its inherent advantages of maskless super resolution [1], offers a potential solution for the high mask cost. In addition, compared with the nanosecond pulses, the femtosecond laser has the advantages of high peak power intensity and a relatively smaller heat-affected zone, which make it ideal for a wide range of applications in other fields of material sciences [2–6]. In many engineering applications ranging from laser micromachining to surface treatment, the femtosecond laser material interaction has become an increasingly hot topic. The laser intensity of femtosecond laser can even be up to 10G L  ⁄ [7], which results in the breaking down of traditional phenomenological laws. Hence, for the purpose of achieving a better comprehension and understanding of the femtosecond laser nanolithography, it is of great necessity to investigate the melting and dynamic effects relating with energy transfer and conversion in the atomic scale. The laser material interaction has attracted considerable attentions in the past two decades due to both the relevant technological importance and theoretical interest. Because the characteristic times of the energy carriers are comparable to the characteristic energy excitation time, there are two competing interpretations to the thermal mechanical phenomena: one is the plasma annealing, another one is thermal annealing. The plasma annealing describes the microscopic

[PAGE 5] 5 mechanism as the lattices of semiconductors directly transform into a disordered state long before the system become thermally excited. For semiconductors, like silicon, phonons are the major energy carriers. Because the free electron density in semiconductor is much lower than that in metal, the participation of electrons can be neglected. The mechanism under femtosecond laser irradiation is generally regarded as an athermal transition, which mainly softens the interatomic bonds in the time domain that is long before the conventional thermal transition caused by heat transfer from the electrons to phonons [8]. After femtosecond laser irradiation, the electrons transform from the bonding to antibonding states by depleting the bond charges. In other words, when the stage of disordering of the latter happens, the ion temperature still remains at room temperature. A tight-binding model was introduced to study the effects of a dense electron-hole plasma on the instability of carbon, silicon and germanium [9,10]. The other alternative explanation is the thermal melting, which requires the direct energy transfer between the excited electrons and the ions. Due to the electron-phonon coupling, the large amount of excited electron energy transfers to ions within the picoseconds time domain, which causes thermal melting of the lattice. For the femtosecond laser, the pulse duration is shorter than the electron-lattice thermalization time (in the order of picosecond). Because the excited electrons do not have sufficient time to transfer a large amount of energy to the ions, plasma annealing seems to be the dominating mechanism. The ultrashort laser pulse makes it possible to excite the electronic states of a solid long before the appreciable energy transporting to the lattice vibrational states. Shank et al. [11] showed transition from crystalline order to disorder with melting of the surface occurred in less than 1 M under 90  laser illumination on silicon. Rousse et al. [12] reported the nonthermal melting process in InSb at femtosecond resolution by using a ultrafast time resolved X-ray

[PAGE 6] 6 diffraction. An atomic-scale visualization of internal dynamics presented by Lindenberg et al. [13] demonstrated the nonthermal transition from crystalline solid to disordered liquid. Apart from experimental investigation, by employing first principles calculation, Zijlstra et al. [14] showed the nonthermal melting of InSb induced by femtosecond laser based on dramatic changes of transverse acoustic phonons at the boundary of Brillouin zone. Subsequently, anharmonic effects which dominate the atomic motions for times greater than 100  were studied [15]. Moreover, the relationship of thermal phonon squeezing under low fluence femtosecond laser irradiation and the same pathways of atomic motion at the first stages of nonthermal melting was reported by Zijlstra et al. [16], which originated from the femtosecond laser induced softening of the interatomic force constant. The concluded that the phonon squeezing playing the role as the precursor to nonthermal melting with the increasing of laser fluence. Threshold intensities of nonthermal phase transition for semiconductors (such as, Si and InSb) were reported by utilizing the semiclassical electron-radiation-ion dynamics (SERID) [17]. In this work, the ab initio molecular dynamics simulation method based on finite temperature (FT-DFT) is used to simulate femtosecond laser interaction of germanium. The approach has already been employed to simulate the laser melting of silicon and graphite [18,19]. Since the FT-DFT method incorporates self-consistently the effect of thermalized electronic excitations and fractionally occupied state, it can reasonably and accurately describe the electronically hot system. The original work of ab initio molecular dynamics of excited electrons was presented by Alavi et al. [20]. We carried out simulation with different incident laser intensities of ~100  time duration. All the cases started from germanium crystal at room temperature (300 ). To obtain the final equilibrium state of the electronic and ionic subsystem, we monitored the temperature of nucleus as output during the entire simulation