[PAGE 1] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 312 (2023) 117827 Available online 25 November 2022 0924-0136/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Femtosecond laser high-quality drilling of film cooling holes in nickel-based single superalloy for turbine blades with a two-step helical drilling method Meng Li a, Zhi-xun Wen a,*, Ping Wang b, Yu-xing Liu a, Zhen-wei Li a,b,**, Zhu-feng Yue a a School of Mechanics, Civil Engineering and Architecture, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, PR China b School of Aerospace Engineering and Applied Mechanics, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, PR China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Femtosecond laser helical drilling Turbine blades Film cooling holes (FCHs) Surface quality Nano-stripes A B S T R A C T A femtosecond laser two-step helical drilling method was proposed, which realized the extremely high-quality machining of film cooling holes (FCHs) on nickel-based single crystal superalloy for turbine blades. The two- step helical drilling increased the exhaust capacity of machining residues, steam and laser-induced plasma, so it avoided the damage and defects, such as recast layers, microcracks and microvoids caused by laser energy shielding and heat accumulation. Furthermore, since more aggressive parameters can be adopted in the first step, and the amount of material removal in the second step was reduced, the two-step helical drilling improved the machining efficiency compared with one-time helical drilling. After two-step helical drilling, sub-wavelength nano-stripes were formed on the hole wall at a certain regular inclination angle along the hole depth direc­ tion. This characteristic feature was caused by the combined action of the periodic distribution of energy due to the interference of the laser and the plasmon, and the high-speed rotation and downward movement of laser beam. With this fundamental understanding of the mechanism, three processing parameters, i.e., laser output power (P), dwell time of single-layer scanning (T) and amount of focal plane drop for single-layer scanning (H), were coherently determined, such that the hole wall surface with nano-roughness without ablation can be realized. 1. Introduction Increasing the inlet temperature of gas turbine is one of the most important technical ways to improve the power and thermal efficiency of gas turbine engine (Perepezko, 2009), so nickel base superalloy with excellent high temperature performance has become the preferred ma­ terial for high-pressure turbine blades of gas turbine engine (Wu et al., 2020a). However, with the continuous improvement of turbocharging ratio, thrust-weight ratio and efficiency of the engine, the temperature in front of the turbine has far exceeded the limit temperature that the nickel-based single superalloy can withstand, so the air film cooling technology has been developed to improve the upper limit of its oper­ ating temperature, and its working principle is to make the cold air introduced into the hollow blade eject from the film cooling holes (FCHs) densely spaced on the blade surface, thus forming a layer of cool air film to block the high-temperature gas constantly acting on the blade (Bogard and Thole, 2006). Although the film cooling technology effec­ tively reduces the temperature of blade surface, the FCHs destroys the structural integrity of turbine blades and causes stress concentration. Under the action of complex loads such as thermal shock, centrifugal force and aerodynamic force (Guo et al., 2021), these dangerous stress concentration area will seriously threaten the structural strength of turbine blades (Wen et al., 2018). What is more noteworthy is that surface quality defects such as recast layer, heat affected zone and microcrack around the FCHs caused by the drilling process will not only lead to the disorder of cooling air flow and affect the cooling efficiency, but also make the FCHs more likely to become the source of crack nucleation and failure fracture (Ebrahimzade et al., 2021). Therefore, improving the drilling quality of the FCHs is of great significance to improve the operation reliability and service life of turbine blades. For machining the FCHs, laser drilling has the advantages of high machining flexibility, high efficiency and low cost compared with me­ chanical drilling (Chen and Liao, 2003), electrical discharge drilling (Muthuramalingam and Mohan, 2015) and electrochemical drilling (Li et al., 2018), and the machining quality of laser drilling has been significantly improved after decades of development (Li et al., 2015). It * Corresponding author. ** Corresponding author at: School of Mechanics, Civil Engineering and Architecture, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, PR China. E-mail addresses: zxwen@nwpu.edu.cn (Z.-x. Wen), zwli@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (Z.-w. Li). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Materials Processing Tech. journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jmatprotec https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2022.117827 Received 1 September 2022; Received in revised form 13 November 2022; Accepted 19 November 2022

[PAGE 2] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 312 (2023) 117827 2 has become one of the main machining and manufacturing methods of FCHs at present (Beck, 2011). In recent years, researchers have explored a large number of methods to improve the laser drilling performance by analyzing different factors affecting the quality characteristics of holes, but they are nothing more than the following four aspects: 1) change the physical properties of laser, such as pulse width, laser wavelength, focusing characteristics (Cao et al., 2018), pulse energy distribution (Long et al., 2021), polarization characteristics (Wang et al., 2021a); 2) adopt different drilling methods, such as percussion drilling (Marimuthu et al., 2019) and multi-pulse trepan drilling (Pattanayak and Panda, 2018); 3) combined with other machining processes, such as laser-electrical discharge drilling(Sahu et al., 2022) and laser-electrochemical drilling (Saxena et al., 2020); 4) Add external factors, such as ultrasonic vibration (Wu et al., 2020b), water medium (Marimuthu and Smith, 2021), auxiliary gas (Fan et al., 2016), magnetic field (Wang et al., 2020), etc. The above methods and technologies have greatly improved the machining quality of holes, especially the appli­ cation of ultrashort pulse laser and trepan drilling technology. However, on the one hand, it can be seen from the existing results that there is still a certain possibility of progress in the holes quality machined by various laser drilling methods, and even for ultrafast laser, the so-called “cold machining” in theory has not been realized. On the other hand, there are many difficulties in the practical application of some methods and technologies in drilling the FCHs, for example, it is difficult to ensure sufficient repetitive positioning accuracy for multiple machining tech­ nology combination, and the machining efficiency of short pulse laser drilling is not ideal. In addition, when the current laser drilling technology is used to drill deep holes, it is a blind hole before penetration. As a result, with the increase of the machining depth, even if the auxiliary high-pressure gas and ultrasonic vibration are used, the spatter formed by machining cannot be completely discharged from the hole in time. First, it adheres to the hole wall, reducing the surface quality of the hole wall. Second, it prevents the laser from effectively removing the unremoved materials, forming local heat accumulation and causing thermal damage. There­ fore, it is necessary to find a more reasonable laser drilling method to further improve the quality of the FCHs. In view of the above problems, a novel femtosecond laser drilling system is adopted in this study, and considering its machining charac­ teristics, a two-step femtosecond helical drilling method is proposed. The process and characteristics of different machining strategies are compared, the effects of machining methods and machining parameters on the surface quality of holes are analyzed, and the forming mechanism of two-step helical drilling is explained. Finally, the high-quality machining of the FCHs is realized, thus providing a new reference method for femtosecond laser drilling the FCHs of turbine blades. 2. Experimental procedures 2.1. Materials The studied material is a nickel-based single crystal superalloy widely used in high-pressure turbine blades of aero-engines. It was cast by the directional solidification method, and the microstructure of the alloy was prepared by high-temperature heat treatment to obtain a regular stable microstructure consisting of γ phase and γ’ phase. Its main elements are shown in Table 1. Considering the crystal orientation and wall thickness of the turbine blade, a flat test piece with a thickness of 1.5 mm was used as the test sample, and its length direction was parallel to the [001]. The simplified model of aero-engine turbine blade with the FCHs, test sample and test alloy microstructure are shown in Fig. 1. 2.2. Femtosecond laser drilling system Schematic diagram of a femtosecond helical drilling system is shown in Fig. 2(a), femtosecond laser pulses are generated by a solid state Yb: KGW laser generator, emitting at a wavelength of 1030 nm with the shortest pulse duration of 220 fs and a repetition frequency of 100 kHz, then femtosecond laser pulses are transmitted to the helical scanning module through the beam expander and the mirror, and the laser scanning path is precisely controlled by the helical scanning module. The focal diameter defined by the intensity decreasing to the maximum value of e−2 is about 23 µm. During machining, the workpiece is fixed on the five axis moving platform with a clamp. The charge coupled device (CCD) is used to locate and monitor the machining state in real time. The machining process is stopped when the hole penetration is detected. At the same time of machining, the high-pressure gas is blown to the machining area by the air compressor to promote the discharge of the removed material. The basic optical transmission principle of the helical scanning module is shown in Fig. 2(b), which is mainly composed of wedges groups, parallel plate and focusing mirror. First of all, the incident laser beam will deflect a certain angle δ after passing through the wedges group consisting of two small angle wedges, δ = 2a (n1-1) sin, where a is the wedge angle, n1 is the wedge refractive index, and is the phase difference between two wedges. Then, the deflected laser beam will shift a certain distance L in parallel after passing through the parallel plate, L=d (1–1/n2), where d is the thickness of the parallel plate and n2 is the refractive index of the parallel plate. Finally, the laser beam is focused by the focusing lens to the focal plane at a slight distance from the op­ tical axis. When the above-mentioned optical devices rotate synchro­ nously at the same angular speed ω, the laser beam will form a circular scanning path with variable radius on the focal plane. The scanning path of the laser beam is shown in Fig. 2(c). The laser beam rotates clockwise outwards and then inwards. When the helical scanning module moves down with the processing time, the variable radius helical scanning path with the focus moving down can be realized. Table 1 Nominal chemical composition of the nickel-based superalloy in wt%. C Cr Ni Co W Mo Al Ti Ta Re Nb B Si Hf 0.015 4.0 Bal. 9.0 8.0 2.0 5.7 ≤0.10 7.0 2.2 1.0 ≤0.02 ≤0.02 1.0 Fig. 1. (a) A simplified geometric model of an aeroengine turbine blade with the FCHs, (b) test materials and samples, (c) microstructure of test alloy. M. Li et al.

[PAGE 3] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 312 (2023) 117827 3 2.3. Test methods and characterization The diameter of the FCHs of turbine blades is generally less than 1 mm, and the FCHs with a diameter of 0.5 mm was taken as an example for experimental research. As shown in Fig. 3, the two-step helical drilling strategy was to split the helical scanning path. The first step was to quickly drill through holes with three different diameters of 0.3 mm, 0.4 mm and 0.48 mm. The second step was to optimize the important machining parameters and carefully process the FCHs to 0.5 mm diameter. At the same time, one-time helical drilling was performed as the test control group. Three holes were drilled for each condition to avoid test error. The rotation speed of the helical scanning module is set as 2500 rpm, and the scan line interval is 10 µm, so that the laser spot can achieve 96.1% and 94.3% overlap rate in radial and circumferential direction respectively, and then the material can be evenly removed layer by layer. Detailed machining parameters are shown in Table 2. The ultra-high speed camera was used to observe the splashing during drilling. After drilling, the samples used to observe surface morphology were cleaned by ultrasonic with acetone and alcohol, and the samples used to observe profile structure were polished and chem­ ically etched (20gCuSO4•5 H2O+5mlH2SO4 +50mlHCl+100mlH2O). Optical microscope (OM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) were used to observe the microstructure of holes wall, and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) was used to analyze the ablation degree and composition of holes walls. 3. Results 3.1. One-time helical drilling In order to clarify the reasons for the poor quality of the FCHs drilled by one-time helical drilling, the FCHs drilled by one-time helical drilling were analyzed first. As shown in Fig. 4, the machining process of the FCHs with one-time helical drilling was divided at equal time intervals. It could be seen that the helical drilling process did not completely ablate the material in the hole, but formed a through hole by removing a cone (Fig. 4(a) and (b)). Although this machining method could ensure that the prepared FCHs could achieve no taper, since the front area of the Fig. 2. (a) A femtosecond helical drilling system, (b) the optical path transmission principle of the helical scanning module, (c) laser helical scanning path. Fig. 3. Drilling strategy of two-step helical drilling. Table 2 Test machining parameters. Machining Parameters Values Laser output power(P) 6,10,14,16w laser wavelength 1030 nm Pulse duration 220fs Pulse repetition frequency 100 kHz Beam quality TEM00(M2 <1.2) Beam waist after focus 23 µm Polarization Linear, horizontal Rotation speed of helical scan module 2500 rpm Scanning line interval 10 µm Dwell time of single-layer scanning (T) 250,500,750,1000 ms Amount of focal plane drop for single-layer scanning (H) 0.005,0.010,0.015,0.020 mm Air-blowing pressure 0.7 MPa M. Li et al.

[PAGE 4] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 312 (2023) 117827 4 machining was a slit that was not conducive to discharging the machining removal, a large number of machining residues adhered to the hole wall, thereby generating a recast layer with a thickness of several microns (Fig. 4(c)). By observing the hole wall of the through hole formed by one-time helical drilling, it could be found that a large number of machining residues were adhered to the hole wall, and there were obvious microcracks and microvoids defects (Fig. 4(d1), (d2), (d3)). It could be seen that it was difficult to machine the FCHs with good surface quality on the turbine blades material by one-time helical drilling. 3.2. First step helical drilling As mentioned above, the one-time helical drilling method had quality problems such as recast layer, ablation and defects. Therefore, a two-step helical drilling machining strategy was proposed. The first step helical drilling was to quickly prefabricate through holes as the "discharge channel" for the second step helical drilling. The cross- sectional morphology of three through holes with different diameters by first step helical drilling were shown in Fig. 5. First of all, it could be seen that the geometric dimensions of the three kinds of prefabricated holes were difficult to control, and the central diameter of the pre­ fabricated holes with the diameters of 0.3 mm and 0.4 mm was signif­ icantly increased. Secondly, the surface quality of the three kinds of prefabricated holes was poor, and holes walls were covered with gray black machining residues. And the smaller the hole diameter, the more machining residues adhered to the hole wall (Fig. 5(a), (b), (c)). By observing the microstructure morphology of the upper, middle and lower regions of the hole wall, it could be found that the upper region (inlet) of the hole wall was covered with relatively loose machining residues, and there were many microcracks in the hole wall of 0.48 mm (Fig. 5(a1), (a2), (a3)). In the middle of the hole wall, a large number of machining residues were adhered to the holes wall, and there were many microvoids (Fig. 5(b1), (b2), (b3)). At the lower region (outlet) of the hole wall, the surface was relatively clean, but in addition to the microvoids, some areas had a prismatic structure (Fig. 5(c1), (c2), (c3)). The above results also illustrated the disadvantages of one-time helical drilling of the FCHs. 3.3. Second step helical drilling According to the machining characteristics of the adopted femto­ second drilling system and the trial drilling, the three most important machining parameters (laser output power (P), dwell time of single- layer scanning (T), and amount of focal plane drop for single-layer scanning (H)) were selected to optimize the quality of the second step helical drilling. 3.3.1. Morphology of holes wall For the three kinds of prefabricated holes with different diameters prepared in the first step helical drilling, three kinds of P were used for the second step helical drilling. The OM and SEM sectional morphology of the FCHs with different P were shown in Fig. 6. It could be seen that the overall machining quality was significantly improved compared with that of one-time helical drilling, the geometric characteristics were better, the hole diameter and taper could be effectively controlled, the Fig. 4. Micro morphology of the FCHs by one-time drilling, (a) OM morphology, (b) SEM morphology, (c) recast layer of the hole wall, (d) microstructure of the hole wall, (d1) upper region of the hole wall, (d2) middle region of the hole wall, (d3) lower region of hole wall. (P = 12w; T = 500 ms; H=0.01 mm). M. Li et al.

[PAGE 5] Journal of Materials Processing Tech. 312 (2023) 117827 5 hole wall section was neat, and there was no obvious adhering machining residue. When P = 6 W, the quality of the FCHs under the condition of 0.3 mm prefabricated holes was relatively poor, some machining residues adhered to the upper region of the hole wall, and there were obvious defects in the middle and upper region of the hole wall. The FCHs under the condition of 0.4 mm and 0.48 prefabricated holes had a small number of microvoids defects in the middle and lower region of the hole wall. When P = 10 W, the quality of the FCHs under the three kinds of prefabricated holes was all better, but there was slight ablation in the middle region of the hole wall, showing a burnt yellow color. When P = 14 W, the geometric characteristics of the FCHs under the three prefabricated hole conditions were good, but there was obvious ablation, and the hole wall appeared as a large area of burnt yellow and dark blue. In conclusion, with the increase of P and pre­ fabricated hole diameter, the ablation degree of hole wall would be greater. This ablation phenomenon with color characteristics would be characterized in detail in section 3.2.2 in combination with micro­ structure morphology and composition analysis. Considering that the geometric quality was poor at lower laser power, the hole wall was severely ablated at higher power, and certain machining efficiency must be ensured, P = 10 W was selected as the laser power parameter for subsequent hole quality optimization. For the prefabricated holes of three diameters, four different T were selected for further holes quality optimization. The OM and SEM section morphologies of the FCHs with different T were shown in Fig. 7. When T = 250 ms, the quality of the hole wall under the condition of 0.3 mm prefabricated hole was unsatisfactory, and gray black machining resi­ dues were adhered to the upper and lower region of the hole wall, but the quality of the hole wall under the condition of 0.4 mm and 0.48 mm prefabricated holes was acceptable. When T = 500 ms, there were a few defects in the upper region of the hole wall under the condition of 0.3 mm prefabricated hole, the quality was generally good under the condition of 0.4 mm prefabricated hole, and there was obvious ablation in the region below the middle of the hole wall under the condition of 0.48 mm prefabricated hole. When T = 750 ms, the quality of the hole wall under the conditions of 0.3 mm and 0.4 mm prefabricated holes was similar and no significant ablation occurred, but the middle region of the hole wall was slightly ablated under the conditions of 0.4 mm prefabricated hole, and the hole wall was significantly ablated under the conditions of 0.48 prefabricated holes. When T = 1000 ms, for 0.3 mm prefabricated holes condition, a prismatic structure parallel to the hole depth appeared in the region below the middle of the hole wall, and for 0.4 mm and 0.48 mm prefabricated holes condition, the hole wall was obviously ablated. In conclusion, the ablation degree of the hole wall gradually increased with the increase of the T and the prefabricated hole diameter. Therefore, considering the ablation degree and geometric quality, for 0.3 mm, 0.4 mm and 0.48 mm prefabricated holes, T = 750 ms, T = 500 ms and T = 250 ms were respectively selected as Fig. 5. Micro morphology of the FCHs by first step drilling, (a) 0.3 mm, (b) 0.4 mm, (c) 0.48 mm. (P = 16w; T = 500 ms; H=0.01 mm). M. Li et al.