[PAGE 1] Optics Communications 475 (2020) 126237 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics Communications journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optcom Fundamental 3D simulation of the femtosecond laser ablation for cooling hole drilling on Ni and Fe based aero-engine components Zenan Yang a, Pengfei Ji b, Zhen Zhang c, Yadong Ju a, Zhen Wang a, Qiang Zhang a, Chenchong Wang c, Wei Xu c,∗ a Science and Technology on Advanced High Temperature Structural Materials Laboratory, Beijing Institute of Aeronautical Materials, Beijing 100095, PR China b Laser Micro/Nano-Fabrication Laboratory, School of Mechanical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, PR China c State Key Laboratory of Rolling and Automation, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, PR China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Femtosecond laser ablation Two-temperature model Crater morphology Recast layer Multipulse percussion A B S T R A C T Femtosecond laser ablation is widely applied in the drilling of film cooling holes of turbine blades and vanes. A deep understanding of the interaction between the femtosecond laser and the target material is crucial for processing parameter optimization. In this work, numerical simulations are performed on the basis of a traditional two-temperature model, and laser irradiation on the surface of Ni-based and Fe-based superalloys is investigated. The evolution of electron and lattice temperature is calculated, and the crater morphology and recast layer thickness are thus determined with respect to the vaporization and melting temperatures. The depth and diameter of the crater and melting front are not greatly changed by advancing the single- pulse energy from 20 μJ to 120 μJ and 720 μJ, which is contrary to the opinion that machining efficiency is strongly determined by the applied pulse energy. However, Fe seems to be more easily ablated than Ni, resulting in a larger crater depth. By setting different values of pulse width, single-pulse energy and electron– phonon coupling strength, the evolution of electron and lattice climax temperature is investigated, and the underlying nature of energy coupling is clarified. The two temperature model is further extended to simulate the multiple-pulse laser percussion process. The crater maintains a rotating parabolic shape while deepening. Interestingly, the material removal rate is the highest at a certain depth for different single-pulse energies and target materials. The physical presence of a first increasing then decreasing trend is analysed in detail. In the end, the relationship between crater depth and pulse number indicates that the focal spot should shift downward by a feeding rate to realize high-efficiency laser ablation. 1. Introduction The efficiency of aero engines is closely related to their turbine inlet temperature, and the rapid development of the aviation industry has facilitated the development of high-temperature alloys, including Ni- based super alloys [1], Co-based super alloys [2] and Fe-based super alloys [3]. The existence of small holes compromises the surface integrity of the components. According to statistical data, microcracks initiating from the walls of cooling holes account for 80% of blade fractures, and more than 50% of them are fatigue cracks. To improve reliability and service life, attention has been paid to enhancing the quality of cooling holes [4], mostly determined by the fabrication method [5]. Electrical-discharge machining (EDM) has been extensively employed for batch production due to its economic cost and efficiency. Nev- ertheless, the mechanism of material removal is based on the heat effect generated by the spark between the electrode and the target ∗Corresponding author. E-mail address: xuwei@ral.neu.edu.cn (W. Xu). material; thus, thermal defects (microcracks, recast layers and heat- affected zones) cannot be avoided [6]. On the other hand, EDM is only suitable for conductive materials, and the processing parameters and electrodes should be adjusted with respect to different types of target materials [7]. Electrochemical machining (ECM) is another commonly adopted processing method. Since ECM is based on electrochemical dis- solution and electrical discharge erosion, the thermal defects generated by EDM drilling are entirely eliminated, and a smooth hole wall with an absence of residual stress is achieved [8]. However, the 𝛾phase is easier to be removed than the 𝛾′ phase in a Ni-based superalloy due to the difference in electrochemical potentials, which leads to an unstable structure. Another restriction of its vast application is its low efficiency [9]. Traditional processing methods are inadequate to realize high-quality hole drilling. Recently, laser machining has emerged as a promising solution to replace the traditional fabrication method of film cooling holes in tur- bine blades and vanes [10]. With the development of the chirped-pulse https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optcom.2020.126237 Received 11 March 2020; Received in revised form 17 June 2020; Accepted 2 July 2020 Available online 3 July 2020 0030-4018/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

[PAGE 2] Z. Yang, P. Ji, Z. Zhang et al. Optics Communications 475 (2020) 126237 amplification (CPA) technique, the single-pulse duration is reduced to the order of femtoseconds (10−15 s), and the intensity is increased to 1021 W/m2. Such an instantaneous and substantial injection of energy results in a highly overheated target material in the vicinity of the focal spot, which is composed of plasma, vapour, liquid droplets or a mixture of them. Considering the spatial and temporal limitations, a real-time observation of the ablation process is difficult to realize experimentally. In this regard, a number of theories have been proposed to explain the underlying physical essence, including phase explosion, Coulomb explosion, homogeneous and heterogeneous melting, and thermoelastic waves. Although the ablation mechanism is still controversial, it is generally accepted that laser energy is first absorbed by electrons and then transferred to the lattice by electron–phonon coupling for metallic target materials. Once the temperatures of the electron and lattice are the same, relaxation occurs when their temperatures change simulta- neously. S. I. Anisimov et al. were the first to describe this process by introducing two temperature systems, and the corresponding model was named the ‘‘two-temperature model’’ [11]. Soon afterwards, many studies were carried out based on two-temperature model simulations of the electron and lattice temperature field evolutions of Al [12,13], Cu [14], Au [15–17], Cr [18], Mo [17], Ni [17,19], Fe [20], etc. These simulation results agree well with experimental crater morphologies. Researchers have further combined the two-temperature model with molecular dynamics (TTM-MD) theory to investigate the response of the target material by ultrafast laser irradiation at the atomic level [21–23]. A number of phenomena that could hardly be captured by experimen- tal observations have been well predicted by TTM-MD simulations, including the generation of crystal defects, phase explosions, photome- chanical spallation, and stress wave propagation [24]. These predicted phenomena are helpful for researchers to reveal the physical traits, but the simulations are so time consuming that microscopic results can hardly be applied to macroscopic discoveries and analysis. Povarnitsyn et al. compared the simulation results of two-temperature hydrody- namics and TTM-MD and found that the two models agree well with each other in terms of phase explosion and spallation [25]. In fact, the drilling of a single cylinder hole (𝛷0.3×1 mm) by a femtosecond laser involves millions of pulses; thus, it is necessary to revert to a traditional TTM and apply it to multi-pulse laser irradiation. Zhang et al. inves- tigated the number of pulses required to drill though a 100 μm thick aluminium film via multi-pulse percussion. The simulation results based on the TTM were verified by experiments [12], indicating that the traditional model was suitable for processing parameter optimization in industrial production. Considering the fabrication of film cooling holes on superalloy components, it is necessary to focus on Ni, Co and Fe alloys. Unfortunately, most previous research has been carried out on Al, Au and Cu. Yang et al. only considered the laser energy distribution along the depth direction, and such a model is unable to predict the thickness of the recast layer [26]. Although recast layer formation could be described on the basis of phase explosion theory, the author assumed that the recast layer/matrix boundary is where the laser energy declines to 1/e of its central intensity, which is apparently incorrect [27]. Experimentally, Feng and Ma et al. proposed a trepanning drilling route and found no recast layer or microcracks on the surface of the hole wall [28–30]. Nevertheless, Zhao et al. argued that percussion exhibits better ablation efficiency than trepanning, and the self-cleaning effect benefits the removal of the melting spatter and recast layer [31]. In this regard, the processing route for the hole drilling of superalloys remains controversial, and the essential difference between the various routes has yet to be analysed theoretically. This paper extends the application of the traditional TTM to the laser fabrication of Ni- and Fe-based superalloys, which are widely used materials in aero-engine components. The evolutions of electron and phonon temperatures are calculated, and the crater morphologies and recast layer thicknesses are determined. In addition, the material removal rate on prepared crater with different depth is investigated to resolve the controversy between percussion and trepanning ablation. This work shows that a traditional TTM can be developed for the optimization of processing parameters. 2. Model description The TTM describes the heat transfer among photons, electrons and lattices by the following two coupled nonlinear differential equa- tions [11]: 𝐶𝑒 𝜕𝑇𝑒 𝜕𝑡= 𝑘𝑒( 𝜕2𝑇𝑒 𝜕𝑥2 + 𝜕2𝑇𝑒 𝜕𝑦2 + 𝜕2𝑇𝑒 𝜕𝑧2 ) −𝑔(𝑇𝑒−𝑇𝑙) + 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) (1) 𝐶𝑙 𝜕𝑇𝑙 𝜕𝑡= 𝑘𝑙( 𝜕2𝑇𝑙 𝜕𝑥2 + 𝜕2𝑇𝑙 𝜕𝑦2 + 𝜕2𝑇𝑙 𝜕𝑧2 ) + 𝑔(𝑇𝑒−𝑇𝑙) (2) where the subscripts e and l represent the electron and lattice parame- ters, respectively; thus, 𝐶𝑒and 𝐶𝑙represent the heat capacity of the electron and lattice. 𝐶𝑙is taken as a constant, and 𝐶𝑒is calculated from a full run quantum treatment for the wide range of electron temperature, as determined by Eq. (3) [32]: 𝐶e = 𝑛𝑒⋅ (𝜕⟨𝜀⟩ 𝜕𝑇𝑒 ) 𝑉 = 𝑛𝑒⋅ ( 𝜕(∑ 𝑘⟨𝑛𝑘⟩𝜀𝑘∕𝑁𝑒 ) 𝜕𝑇𝑒 ) 𝑉 (3) where 𝑛𝑒is the electron density, and the kinetic energy 𝜖is expressed as: ∑ 𝑘 ⟨𝑛𝑘⟩𝜀𝑘∕𝑁𝑒= ∫∞ 0 1 exp((𝜀−𝜇)∕𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑒) 𝜌𝜀⋅𝑑𝜀 ∫∞ 0 1 exp((𝜀−𝜇)∕𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑒) 𝜌⋅𝑑𝜀 (4) 𝜇is the chemical potential, and is given by: 𝜇= 𝜀𝐹⋅ ( 1 −𝜋2 12 (𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑒 𝜀𝐹 )2) (5) 𝑘𝐵is the Boltzmann constant, and 𝜀𝐹is the Fermi energy: 𝜀𝐹= ( ℎ2 8𝑚𝑒 ) ⋅ (3𝑛𝑒 𝜋 )2∕3 (6) In Eq. (4), 𝜌is the electron density of states at a given kinetic energy 𝜀, which is written as: 𝜌= 8 √ 2𝜋𝑚3∕2 𝑒 ℎ3 √ 𝜀 (7) In Eqs. (1) and (2), 𝑘𝑒and 𝑘𝑙are the thermal conductivities. Here, 𝑘𝑒 changes with the ratio of electron temperature over lattice temperature by Eq. (8) [16], while 𝑘𝑙only varies with lattice temperature, as listed in Table 1 [33]; 𝑘𝑒= 𝑘0 𝑇𝑒 𝑇𝑙 (8) g is the electron–phonon coupling strength, and Q(x,y,z,t) is the energy absorption rate of the electron system [34]: 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) = 𝑆(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) ⋅𝑇(𝑡) (9) where 𝑆(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 1 −𝑅 𝐿𝑝 ⋅𝐹⋅ 𝜔2 0 𝜔2(𝑧) ⋅exp(−𝑧−𝑧𝑠 𝐿𝑝 −2(𝑥−𝑥0)2 + 2(𝑦−𝑦0)2 𝜔2(𝑧) ) (10) 𝑇(t) = 1 𝑡𝑝 √ 4 ln 2 𝜋 exp ( −4 ln 2 ( 𝑡−2𝑡𝑝 𝑡𝑝 )2) (11) In the above equations, S(x, y, z) and T(t) describe the spatial distribution and temporal evolution of the absorbed laser energy, re- spectively; R is the reflectivity as determined by the target material; 𝐿𝑝is the depth of ballistic transportation, which is sometimes written as the sum of optical penetration and ballistic length; F is the laser fluence; 𝑤0 represents the radius where the intensity of laser energy decreases to 1/e of its central intensity; 𝑥0 and 𝑦0 identify the position of the laser beam spot centre, 𝑧𝑠records the crater profile after each pulsed ablation; and 𝑡𝑝is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) pulse duration. 2

[PAGE 3] Z. Yang, P. Ji, Z. Zhang et al. Optics Communications 475 (2020) 126237 Table 1 Physical parameters of the target material for TTM simulation. Physical parameter Symbol Value Reference Ni Reflectance of the target material R 0.65 [35] Depth of ballistic transportation 𝐿𝑝 13.5 nm [36] Lattice constant a 3.52 Å Lattice structure N/A Face centred cubic [37] Coefficient of thermal conductivity of electron 𝑘0 91 J/(m K s) [17] Heat capacity of lattice 𝐶𝑙 4.1∗106 J/(m3 K) [17] Thermal conductivity of lattice 𝑘𝑙 3.496+0.026733∗Tl-1.11803∗10−5T2 l +3.60684∗10−9T3 l +8.23555∗10−14T4 l J/(m K s) [33] Electron–phonon coupling strength g 3.6∗1017 W/(m3 K) [17] Melting temperature 𝑇𝑀 1728 K [38] Vaporization temperature 𝑇𝑉 3003 K [38] Fe Reflectance of the target material R 0.65 [20] Depth of ballistic transportation 𝐿𝑝 18.5 nm [20] Lattice constant a 3.51 Å Lattice structure N/A Face centred cubic [37] Coefficient of thermal conductivity of electron 𝑘0 80.4 J/(m K s) [20] Heat capacity of lattice 𝐶𝑙 3.8∗106 J/(m3 K) [20] Thermal conductivity of lattice 𝑘𝑙 8.3 J/(m K s) [39] Electron–phonon coupling strength g 3∗1017 W/(m3 K) [20] Melting temperature 𝑇𝑀 1808 K [40] Vaporization temperature 𝑇𝑉 3023 K [40] In Eq. (10), laser beam spot size w is a function of axial depth z, and S(x, y, z) weakens as it moves away from the focal plane. Thus, the following equations are employed: 𝐿𝑅= 𝑛⋅𝜋⋅𝜔2 0 𝜆 (12) 𝜔(𝑧) = 𝜔0 ⋅ √ 1 + 𝑧2 𝐿2 𝑅 (13) Here, 𝐿𝑅is the Rayleigh length; refractive index n is assumed to be 1 [12], and the femtosecond laser wavelength 𝜆is 1030 nm. The laser fluence F is related with single pulse energy E by the following equation [41]: 𝐹= 2𝐸 𝜋⋅𝜔2 0 (14) The finite element method is employed to resolve the coupled partial differential Eqs. (1) and (2). The initial temperatures of the lattice and electron systems are assumed to be at ambient temperature, i.e., 300 K. The values of the physical parameters of the target material and the processing parameters used are listed in Table 1 and Ta- ble 2, respectively. In previous studies, material removal occurred when the lattice temperature exceeded the melting point [42], vaporization point [43] or thermodynamic critical temperature [12]. In fact, the use of a servo-assisted argon flow during hole drilling facilitates the re- moval of plasma, vapour and even fragments broken up by stress waves. In this respect, the thermodynamic critical temperature is too high to predict the crater morphology by ultrafast laser ablation. The present work assumes that material removal occurs once the lattice temperature exceeds the vaporization point, and a recast layer is formed when the lattice temperature is between the melting point and vaporization point. Boundary conditions have a strong effect on the simulation results. It is assumed that there is no heat transfer across the top surface of the work piece, while the lattice and electron temperature on the other five boundaries always equals the ambient temperature. The boundary condition at the crater surface could hardly be evaluated, which is determined by the interaction between the blowing air and the metal vapour. To simplify the assessment, we also assume that no heat transfer is allowed through the crater surface. This is reasonable since heat diffusion is more effective through the metal matrix than heat radiation through the crater surface. Table 2 Processing parameters of femtosecond laser ablation. Physical parameter Symbol Value Laser fluence E 20 μJ/120 μJ (default)/720 μJ Repetition rate f 10 kHz Wavelength 𝜆 1030 nm Full width at half maximum (FWHM) pulse duration 𝑡𝑝 50 fs/100 fs (default)/200 fs Beam waist 𝑤0 4.5 μm 3. Model application and results The temperature evolution of electrons and lattices of Ni by single- pulse femtosecond laser irradiation is plotted in Figs. 1 and 2. Once a laser is applied, the temperature elevation of the electron is much faster than that of the lattice. In particular, the electron temperature in the vicinity of the laser spot centre reaches 1.7×105 K within 100 fs and more than 7×105 K after irradiation, while the lattice remains cool within 100 fs, and only a small region on the surface layer is vaporized by 200 fs. With no further energy input by laser irradiation, the electron system starts to cool down by heat diffusion to the surrounding electrons and heat transfer to the lattice. On the other hand, the increase in lattice temperature leads to more material being removed by vaporization, and the crater thus formed is shown in Fig. 2(c–f). The consistent energy transportation from electron to lattice increases both the diameter and depth of the crater, and the heat diffusion within the matrix results in a broader and deeper heat-affected zone over time. Eventually, the relaxation between electron and lattice energy comes to the end when a thermodynamic equilibrium state is established, as shown in Fig. 3. The recast layer/matrix interface is essentially the melting front, which is captured by the melting temperature of Ni as marked on the colour bar. Afterwards, the electron temperature and lattice temperature decrease simultaneously, and it takes several nanoseconds to reach ambient temperature. The thickness of the recast layer is determined in combination with the crater surface, and the geometric morphology and microstructure do not change any more once the temperature relaxation process is accomplished. Fig. 4(a–c) displays the crater morphology for various single-pulse energies at the thermodynamic equilibrium state, and (d–f) shows the corresponding recast layer/matrix interface contour profiles. The increase in the single-pulse energy has a much stronger effect on the 3

[PAGE 4] Z. Yang, P. Ji, Z. Zhang et al. Optics Communications 475 (2020) 126237 Fig. 1. Evolution of electron temperature vs time of Ni by 120 μJ single-pulse femtosecond laser irradiation: (a) 50 fs; (b) 100 fs; (c) 200 fs; (d) 300 fs; (e) 1 ps; (f) 3 ps. increase in crater depth than its radius. Fig. 5 shows the dynamic evo- lution of the crater geometry and recast layer/matrix interface counter geometry for the three pulse energies applied in Fig. 4. The material removal rate is quite high in the initial 3 picoseconds, while it becomes sluggish afterwards. The same colour group in Fig. 5 represents the crater morphology and recast layer/matrix interface for a specific pulse energy, so the region between them represents the evolution of recast layer thickness. The simulation result indicates that an increase in the single-pulse energy does not lead to a thicker recast layer, implying that the quality is not sacrificed by efficiency in this manner. In fact, the efficiency of femtosecond laser ablation has long been questioned for industrial applications due to its low material removal rate. Some re- searchers have proposed investigating high-power laser sources, which can produce larger single-pulse energy levels. However, the crater depth only increases 0.028 μm with an increase of pulse energy from 20 μJ to 120 μJ and increases another 0.023 μm with a further increase of 600 μJ. It appears that machining efficiency is negligibly improved solely by promoting the single-pulse energy. The material removal rate is not only determined by laser energy input but also affected by the intrinsic physical properties of the target material. A 120 μJ single-pulse irradiation forms a deeper crater on the Fe surface than on the Ni surface, as shown in Fig. 6. This could be explained by a larger depth of ballistic transportation of the laser through the Fe matrix than the Ni matrix. In addition, the recast layer thickness of the Fe crater is almost the same as that of Ni crater, pre- sumably because of the similar melting temperature and vaporization temperature of Fe and Ni. Fig. 7 shows the variation in the maximum temperature of the lattice and electrons of Ni and Fe as a function of time for the system shown in Fig. 6. It is interesting to note that three stages are observed on electron temperature evolution curve, including heating, fast cooling and slow cooling stages. The curves of Ni and Fe systems almost coincide with each other, indicating that the difference in intrinsic physical properties of the two studied metal plays a negligible role. In the first stage, the strong photon–electron energy coupling leads to a dramatic elevation of electron temperature. On the other hand, the energy coupling between lattice and electron is not as strong, resulting in a gradual increase of lattice temperature. Ablation of target material occurs when the lattice temperature rises above the melting point. In subsequent cooling stages, the decline of laser source energy over time, heat diffusion within the matrix and ablation of the target material all contribute to the decrease of climax electron temperature, while the maximum temperature of the lattice remains constant during its vaporization. The gradual transition from fast cooling to slow cooling stage occurs after several hundreds of femtoseconds, corresponding to the end of laser irradiation. Since the electron temperature cannot be accurately characterized by the current experimental method, such a transition has rarely been reported by other researchers. The competition among laser irradiation, thermal diffusion and material ablation should be clarified in detail. 4. Discussion 4.1. Physical essence of photon–electron and electron–phonon energy cou- pling The variation of climax temperature is drawn for different pulse durations by adjusting the values of full pulse width at half maximum (FWHM) in Fig. 8. Since the single-pulse energies of the three curves are all kept at 120 μJ, the temperature evolution is only influenced by the pulse duration. By reducing the pulse width, the temporal laser intensity is promoted, and the energy absorption rate of the electron system is also improved, leading to a more rapid increase of electron 4

[PAGE 5] Z. Yang, P. Ji, Z. Zhang et al. Optics Communications 475 (2020) 126237 Fig. 2. Evolution of lattice temperature vs time of Ni by 120 μJ single pulse femtosecond laser irradiation: (a) 50 fs; (b) 100 fs; (c) 200 fs; (d) 300 fs; (e) 1 ps; (f) 3 ps. Fig. 3. Temperature field of electron and lattice of Ni at the relaxation equilibrium state. temperature in the first stage. As a result, the lattice ‘feels’ the hot electrons, and its first stage is accelerated as well. The time of transition from stage I to stage II coincides with the time when vaporization of the matrix takes place. For samples irradiated by longer pulse duration, there is more time for electron heat diffusion and thermal coupling, thus the climax temperature of electron is the lowest in 200 fs case. In the cooling stage, the electron system continuously absorbs energy by laser irradiation, although the laser intensity decays over time. Even so, the ‘hot’ region is removed by vaporization, resulting in a downward trend on the curve of climax electron temperature evolution. The temperature gap between electron and lattice gets smaller by the increase of time, so the ablation efficiency is reduced. This explains the gradual transition to slow cooling stage over time. On the other hand, the temperature evolution of electron and lattice system must be strongly influenced by the applied single-pulse energy. Three different pulse energies are adopted, which are displayed in Fig. 9. When the single pulse energy is promoted, the electron and lattice are heated faster, and the ablation of target material occurs earlier. The cooling stages for various pulse energies are almost the same, indicating the subsequent thermal diffusion and electron–phonon energy coupling process is seldomly affected by the laser energy deposited. In fact, the effectiveness of electron–phonon coupling also plays an important role in the variation of climax temperature evolution of electron and lattice systems. Electron–phonon coupling strength g in the current model is employed to quantify the effect, and different values have been suggested in previous studies, including 3.6 ∗1017 W/(m3 K) [17], 8 ∗1017 W/(m3 K) [44], and 10.5 ∗1017 W/(m3 K) [45]. The electron temperature elevation in the first stage is mainly dom- inated by the laser energy deposited, so the three curves in Fig. 10 almost coincide with each other. However, a more effective electron– phonon coupling ensures more energy transferred to the lattice; thus, the heating up of lattice is accelerated by a larger coupling strength g, leading to a slight difference in the first stage. Accordingly, the transition from stage I to stage II occurs earlier for larger values of 5

[PAGE 6] Z. Yang, P. Ji, Z. Zhang et al. Optics Communications 475 (2020) 126237 Fig. 4. (a–c) Crater morphologies and (d–f) melting front contour profiles for various single-pulse energies of femtosecond laser: (a, d) 20 μJ; (b, e) 120 μJ; (c, f) 720 μJ. Fig. 5. Effect of single-pulse energy on the geometric characteristics of the crater and recast layer vs time of Ni. Fig. 6. Centreline profiles of crater morphology and recast layer of Fe and Ni by 120 μJ single-pulse femtosecond laser irradiation. Fig. 7. Climax temperature of electron and lattice system in residual region vs time for Fe and Ni. Fig. 8. Climax temperature evolution of the electron and lattice system of Ni in residual region for various pulse durations (𝐸= 120 μJ). 6