[PAGE 1] IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, vol. 60, no. 9, September 2013 1917 0885–3010/$25.00 © 2013 IEEE Fuzzy Similarity Measures for Detection and Classification of Defects in CFRP Diego Pellicanó, Isabella Palamara, Student Member, IEEE, Matteo Cacciola, Salvatore Calcagno, Mario Versaci, and Francesco Carlo Morabito, Senior Member, IEEE Abstract—The systematic use of nondestructive testing as- sumes a remarkable importance where on-line manufacturing quality control is associated with the maintenance of complex equipment. For this reason, nondestructive testing and evalu- ation (NDT/NDE), together with accuracy and precision of measurements of the specimen, results as a strategic activity in many fields of industrial and civil interest. It is well known that nondestructive research methodologies are able to provide information on the state of a manufacturing process without compromising its integrity and functionality. Moreover, exploi- tation of algorithms with a low computational complexity for detecting the integrity of a specimen plays a crucial role in real-time work. In such a context, the production of carbon fiber resin epoxy (CFRP) is a complex process that is not free from defects and faults that could compromise the integrity of the manufactured specimen. Ultrasonic tests provide an effec- tive contribution in identifying the presence of a defect. In this work, a fuzzy similarity approach is proposed with the goal of localizing and classifying defects in CFRP in terms of a sort of distance among signals (measure of ultrasonic echoes). A field-programmable gate array (FPGA)-based board will be also presented which implements the described algorithms on a hardware device. The good performance of the detection and classification achieved assures the comparability of the results with the results obtained using heuristic techniques with a higher computational load. I. Introduction D uring the life-cycle of a manufactured article, the on- going variations of load, together with the vibrational regime which the product can be subjected to, may seri- ously undermine the quality of the material, compromis- ing its integrity or functionality (in the eventual presence of defects). It appears inevitable to proceed with tech- niques of nondestructive inspection, such as ultrasonic tests (UTs), to investigate on the quality of the single process. According to the current regulations, it can be done during the life-cycle of the manufactured article, aiming at the safety and the regularity of the functional aspect. In the industrial and civil fields, carbon fiber resin epoxy (CFRP) play a key role considering that the inte- grating parts of elements subjected to stimulus lead to a fast structural deterioration. Therefore, it is imperative to guarantee the perfect state of each part. However, the production techniques are not free from generating defeats such as delaminations, inclusions, and porosity, for which it is necessary to introduce tests of the integrity. In such a context, nondestructive testing (NDT), and in particular UTs, can be used to achieve our goals with a good resolu- tion and versatility [1]. However, for the application level, the defects are not considered the same, meaning that some defects could undermine the quality of the manu- factured article more than other defects. It is necessary to classify such defects starting from nondestructive analysis [2], [3]. Unfortunately, in many applications, the distinction among defects cannot be easily resolved through a simple visual inspection of the ultrasound signals, because dif- ferent types of defects produce similar signals. Thus, the problem of classification is ill-posed. The international sci- entific community constantly works to look for solutions to the resolution to solve the problem from different points of view [4], [5]. For example, statistical, neural networks, and tomography approaches have been exploited to treat the problem at hand [4]–[7]. In addition, a meaningful contribution, reported in [8] and [9], faces the problem of the classification through a heuristic approach start- ing from ad hoc features extracted directly from measure- ments carried out in laboratory, in a sort of learning by sample regularization [8], [9]. Particularly, wavelet trans- form (WT) was exploited in [8] to refer to the representa- tion of a signal in terms of a finite length or fast decaying oscillating waveform (the so-called mother wavelet) scaled and translated to match the input signal. Therefore, in a wavelet domain, local and global dynamics of a signal can be split in frequency domain by multi-resolution analysis (MRA), which is less sensitive to noise than Fourier trans- form. MRA has been applied to analyze signals to retrieve features for characterizing a trend into different domains (time, spatial, or frequency domains) condensing in the wavelet approximation and detail coefficients at low and high frequencies of signals and classifying data by means of the cross-WT (product of WT of the analyzed signals and the complex conjugated WT of a benchmarking refer- ence). A statistical approach based on principal compo- nent analysis (PCA) has been used in [7] to reduce data dimensions by means of their transformation into a new coordinates system in which the greatest variance by any projection of the data comes to lie on the first coordinate (first principal component), the second greatest variance on the second coordinate, and so on, retaining those char- acteristics that contribute most to its variance, by keep- ing lower-order principal components (often containing Manuscript received May 11, 2012; accepted May 21, 2013. This work has been funded by the Italian Ministry of Education and Research, within the Prin 2009 Project Programme (Prot. N2009TCLKNF_002). The authors are with the Department of Civil, Energy, Environmental, and Mechanical Engineering, University Mediterranea of Reggio Cal- abria, Reggio Calabria, Italy (e-mail: matteo.cacciola@unirc.it). DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TUFFC.2013.2776 Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 10,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[PAGE 2] IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, vol. 60, no. 9, September 2013 1918 the most important information of the data) and ignoring higher-order ones. On this basis, it is possible to build a database with a preprocessing of experimental measures so that the selected features can perform a satisfactory classification without running into the course of the prob- lem of dimensionality. This method implies an excessive increase of computational complexity without a creditable gain in terms of performance. The idea of the present work arises from the fact that the presence of a defect in an ultrasound signal deviates from a benchmarking defectless signal. Therefore, the pres- ence of a defect, sometimes not visible to naked eye, can be seen as a reduction of its similarity with a signal with- out defects. Because the ultrasound signals (with or with- out defect) are affected by uncertainty (due to sampling, noise, etc.), it appears natural to formulate the problem in fuzzy terms. In the past, many authors have studied signal processing problems by means of fuzzy techniques in many domains of applied sciences. First, naïve and au- tomatic fuzzy logic systems (in which the expert’s knowl- edge played a crucial role) have been designed to solve many questions in signal processing in which uncertainty, vagueness and noise corrupted data. Then, more sophis- tical fuzzy approaches have been carried out by means of different procedures as reported in [10], [11]. In the field of NDT/NDE, fuzzy philosophy has been exploited for detecting and classifying defects in specimens of civil or industrial interest (as previously described) but the concept of fuzzy similarity (well-known in biomedical do- mains [12], [13]) among UT signals is still an open issue in NDT/NDE fields [14]. In particular, classes of defects may be characterized by a particular range of values of fuzzy similarity, so that the classification of an unknown sig- nal occurs through a comparison with values of similarity. The proposed procedure further has a double advantage: on one hand, a classification with a low computational cost (useful in on-line applications); on the other hand, solving the problem of doubtful cases in terms of presence or absence of defects. In the past, fuzzy similarities have been studied in many scientific areas [15], [16] but no em- phasis has been placed on their relation to detection and classification tasks in NDT/NDE applications [8], [9]. The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes defectiveness in CFRP. Here, characteristics of each type of defect are described. Section III shows the fundamental properties of fuzzy similarities as the exploited classifica- tion tool. Subsequently, the new approach to the classifi- cation problem is presented. Finally, hardware deployment is depicted in Section VI and some conclusions are drawn. II. Defectiveness in CFRP: An Overview As reported in the previous section, the production pro- cesses for a manufactured article can generate defects such as delamination, inclusions, and porosity. Delaminations, with typical dimensions of many millimeters squared, can be described as a sort of horizontal separation between neighboring plies resulting from gaseous formation dur- ing the polymerization process. In particular, groups of small delaminations looking like little pores, the so-called microdelaminations (in the order of tens of squared milli- meters), can be distributed at different depths. Inclusions consist of an extraneous material which is accidentally in- cluded within the manufactured object during the working phase; the size depends on the type of object left in the material. Porosity consists of spherical or elliptical voids of micrometer scale distributed inside the material. They are caused by gradients of temperature and pressure that arise during the process of polymerization. The size of the porosities is highly variable (few tens of micrometers, usu- ally, although some pores can also reach a diameter of a few tens of millimeters). In many cases it is very difficult to distinguish the kind of a defect through a simple visual inspection of the ultra- sonic signal, because different kinds of defects can gener- ate similar ultrasonic signals. For this reason, the problem of classification presents ill-posed features. In Fig. 1 typi- cal ultrasonic A-scans are represented. For example, in delamination [Fig. 1(b)], the signal shows an initial peak resulting from the reflection of the ultrasound signal on the specimen surface (i.e., the front echo) and a second peak resulting from the reflection on the defect. The back- wall echo, because of the reflection on the bottom of the specimen, could not be present because the delamination reflected the signal. For the inclusion [Fig. 1(c)], the sig- nal looks like the one related to the delamination, but the acoustic impedance of the extraneous material is higher than that of air. Therefore, the ultrasonic signal is not generally reflected by the defect, and the back-wall echo occurs. For porosity [Fig. 1(d)], volumes characterized by a reduced number of pores (of the order of a few hun- dreds of micrometers) could not be drawn by pulse-echo techniques. Therefore, a soft computing-based approach can be very useful for an automatic and real-time flaw classification. III. Exploited Toolbox: The Concept of Fuzzy Similarity It is known that a fuzzy set A can be considered as an abstract quantity close to other ones in a certain measure. Membership functions that characterize a fuzzy set are considered the kernel of mapping between objects and point elements belonging to [0,1]. An alternative approach is to consider a fuzzy set as a point into a certain space in which a particular metric is defined. Mathematically, if gik is the so-called metrical tensor, ds2 = gikdxidxk represents the general formulation of a metric. In this way, ds = g x x ik i k d d or s = ∫ds = ∫ g x x ik i k d d represents the distance among points in that space metrically governed by gik. However, ds2 is an invariant when changing of co- ordinates systems takes place (from xi to x′i), for which ds2 = ds′2, and it is permitted to consider the problem of Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 10,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[PAGE 3] pellicanó et al.: fuzzy similarity measures for detection and classification of defects in cfrp 1919 distance computation in the n-dimensional Euclidean space, ℜn, where gik = δik (Kronecher‘s delta) and the metric can be easy written as ds2 = (dx1)2 + (dx2)2 + + (dxn)2 or, by means of Einstein convention, ds2 = (dxi)2 i = 1,…,n. Therefore, the distance between two fuzzy sets A and B, i.e., the distance d(A, B) between A and B as points in n-dimensional Euclidean space, is represented by the length of the line that connects points A and B. In our case, the set A can represent a signal with a defect, and B a signal without defect, for which d(A, B) could be useful to evaluate how close a signal with a defect is to a defect- free signal (classification problem). However, it is not cor- rect to consider a defect as a point A, because apparently different signals arise from the same defect. In other words, it is convenient to use A to identify a class of signals char- acterized by a certain defect and B to identify the class of signals without defects. In this paper, the authors trans- late the classification problem by d(A, B) into an equiva- lent problem in terms of similarity. In particular, the pres- ence of a defect in an ultrasound signal can be seen as a reduction of its similarity with the whole class of signals without defection. In the scientific literature, many au- thors have proposed fuzzy similarity measures (FSs), dis- cussing and defining them from geometrical [17] and set- theoretical points of view [18], [19]. To understand how a FS works, let us start from a universal set X of items and, on it, define a set of all fuzzy sets F(X). In this domain, it is possible to quantify the similarity between two fuzzy sets A and B, both belonging to F(X), through a function S, called similarity, defined on F 2(X) to [0, ∞] which satis- fies the following properties: 1) S(A, B) = S(B, A); 2) If A ⊂ B ⊂ C, then S(A, B) ≥ S(A, C) and S(B, C) ≥ S(A, C), with A, B, C belonging to F(X); 3) S(D, D) = maxA,B∈F(X)S(A, B), ∀D ∈ F(X); and 4) S C C ( ; ) = 0, ∀C ∈ P(X) with P(X) as set of all the crisp sets. Note that 1) condition 1 states that judgment of similarity is symmetrical (A is similar to B and B is similar to A at same level); 2) condition 2 implies that the similarity measure is monotonic; 3) condition 3 states that it is reflexive—this property establishes that the similarity degree of any set with itself has the highest value; and 4) condition 4 states that similarity between a set and its compliment is zero. To underline the fuzzy nature of the measure of similarity, it is preferred to normalize S, changing its formulation as Fig. 1. Some A-scan exemplifying the problem of defect characterization in carbon fiber resin epoxy (CFRP). Ultrasonic pulses (a) without defect, (b) with delamination, (c) with inclusion, and (d) with porosity. Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 10,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[PAGE 4] IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, vol. 60, no. 9, September 2013 1920 S : F 2(X) → [0, 1]. In this case, properties 1, 2, and 3 can be rewritten as 1) S(A, B) = S(B, A); 2) if A ⊂ B ⊂ C, then S(A, B) ≥ S(A, C) and S(B, C) ≥ S(A, C); and 3) S(A, A) = 1. In this paper, two different approaches to quantitatively evaluate the goodness of FS in terms of classifier are taken into account. A. Fuzzy Similarity: A First Approach In the first approach, FS comes out of the computation of a distance. At the beginning, it is necessary to calcu- late a measure of a distance to determine the measure of similarity. From the literature, FS can be formulated in different forms [19]: S A B n i n A B A B 1 =1 ( , ) = 1 ∑ − − min( ) max( ) µ µ µ µ (1) S A B n A B i n 2 =1 ( , ) = 1 − − ∑ µ µ (2) S A B i n A B A B 3 =1 ( , ) = 1 − − + ∑ µ µ µ µ (3) S A B A B 4( , ) = 1 1 + − µ µ , (4) where n is the number of elements contained in the fuzzy sets A and B, and μA = μA(xi) and μB = μB(xi) are the membership values of the elements of A and B fuzzy sets, respectively. In addition, when μA(xi) = μB(xi) = 1, the two sets are exactly similar. Obviously, ||μA − μB|| is a fuzzy distance measure, like the Hamming distance d(A, B) = i n A B =1 ∑ − µ µ or the Euclidean distance d(A, B) = i n A B =1 2 ∑ − µ µ . B. Fuzzy Similarity: A Second Approach By this approach, the similarity should be evaluated by looking into the common and distinctive features of the two sets [20]. In this case, instead of considering fuzzy sets (or classes of them) as points in a metric space, fuzzy similarity describes them using set of features (sets of logic predicates), underlining the idea that humans are more focused on the common features in similarity judgment. If a and b are two signals, then A and B are two sets of features, and the similarity between A and B is denot- ed S(A, B). The cardinal assumptions are matching and monotonicity [20]: 1) matching: S(a, b) = F(A ∩ B, A − B, B − A); 2) monotonicity: S(a, b) > S(a, c); 3) whenever A ∩ C ⊆ A ∩ B, A − B ⊆ A − C, B − A ⊆ C − A. A generalized index (GI) of similarity measure, exploiting fuzzy predicates and providing a set of theoretical indices for similarity assessment based on human perception, is presented in [21]. It has been defined as follows: GI( , , , ) = A B f A B f A B f A B f B A α β α β ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ), ∩ ∩ + − + − (5) where f is a nonnegative monotone increasing function; A and B are two sets of predicates of the measurement; A ∩ B represents the common features; A − B(B − A) denotes the features of A(B) that are not present in B(A); α, β ≥ 0 are two parameters determining the importance of the features of A and B sets. In particular, if A is more impor- tant than B, using the mint-norm, the formulation of GI takes the form of S A B A B i n A B i n 5 =1 =1 ( , , , ) = , , α β µ µ µ µ min( ) min( ) , ∑ ∑ + + Ω Ψ (6) which represents, in terms of membership functions, the FS formulated through the second approach. Here Ω = α min(μA, 1 − μB) and Ψ = β min(1 − μA, μB). Obviously, when μA = μB, the similarities take a unit value. For our goals, the classes of signals with defects were labeled Aj (there are as many classes as types of defects), while the only class of defect-free signals is labeled with B. More- over, we can verify that the different formulations of FS fit well with the aim of defects classification as described in Section V. However, it is very important to define an index that is able to quantitatively compute how fuzzy a signal is. In particular, linear index (LI) and fuzzy entropy (FE) have been taken into account for the purpose. When lower values of LI and FE are computed, there is no defect in the specimen; the presence of defect is characterized by their high values [22]: LI = 2 , 1 =1 n i n A A ∑ − min( ( )) µ µ (7) FE = 1 =1 n M N i n i i ∑ − ( ), (8) where Mi = −μA log(μA) and Ni = (1 − μA)log(1 − μA). When lower values of LI and FE are computed, fuzziness is not present in the signal under study. The presence of fuzziness is characterized by their high values [23]. IV. The Experimental Database Different kinds of defects were artificially generated on different areas of test specimens, as shown in Fig. 2. Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 10,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[PAGE 5] pellicanó et al.: fuzzy similarity measures for detection and classification of defects in cfrp 1921 The defects were generated according to the usual prac- tice to provide characteristics similar to flaws caused by normal wear. Delamination-like and inclusion flaws were realized in a 301 × 355 × 4 mm CFRP panel. On the same panel, defect-free areas were detected and inspected to obtain benchmarking ultrasonic signals. Another 39 × 40 × 3 mm CFRP panel with porosity defects was used. In both cases, a 5-MHz UT probe has been used, with 100 MHz sampling frequency; the speed of the ultrasonic wave on CFRP is 3000 m/s. The measurements were car- ried out by Alenia Aeronautica S.p.A (Pomigliano d’Arco, Italy), the owner of the database. Specimens have been immersed into water. We ob- tained information related to two peaks from the reference (benchmarking) signals: a front wall echo, also called the top echo, and a bottom echo, resulting from the reflection of the ultrasonic wave on the specimen’s top and bottom surfaces, respectively. Another peak can be between these two echoes when a defect is present and detected inside the specimen (Fig. 3). Output ultrasonic signals have been preprocessed to extract the part of it included between the front wall and the bottom echo. For further information about the data set, see [9]. Of course, qualitative inspec- tion is not sufficient to classify signals in the presence of Fig. 2. The two specimens used to implement the ultrasonic database: (a) 301 × 355 × 4 mm panel containing delamination-like and inclusion flaws, and no defect area; (b) 39 × 40 × 3 mm panel with porosity. In both cases, a 5-MHz ultrasound test probe has been used, with 100 MHz sampling frequency; speed of the ultrasonic wave on carbon fiber resin epoxy (CFRP) is 3000 m/s. Top defect means a defect between 0% and 30% of the specimen’s thickness, middle defect between 30% and 60%, and bottom defect between 60% and 100%. Fig. 3. Plot of an ultrasonic signal included in the set related to defect-free areas. Within the FFT, it is possible to observe that the main frequency is equal to the half of the sampling ultrasound frequency, according to the Nyquist theorem. Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 10,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[PAGE 6] IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, vol. 60, no. 9, September 2013 1922 defects, because they are too similar each other (Fig. 4). Furthermore, the problem of the doubtful cases is well known in the industrial field. It has not been satisfactorily solved by sophisticated techniques of classification [8], or it requires high-complexity algorithms [9]. The proposal of a new procedure of classification based on fuzzy similar- ity, reported in the next section, solves the problem of the classification of defects in a more exhaustive way, thanks to a reduced computational load. V. Classification Procedures A. Step 1: Statistical Analysis of the Ultrasonic Signals Because ultrasonic signals related to a particular defect are similar to each other, it appears clear that the respec- tive statistical parameters also present an analogous simi- larity. In parallel, all signals without defects present the same feature of similarity. For example, let us consider all Fig. 4. Bar graph related to the classes (a) without defect and (b) with bottom delamination. Fig. 5. Gaussian membership functions related to classes B and Aj. Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 10,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.