[PAGE 1] Vol.:(0123456789) 1 3 Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics (2019) 30:10183–10190 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10854-019-01354-5 Laser‑drilling formation of through‑glass‑via (TGV) on polymer‑laminated glass Yoichiro Sato1 · Nobuhiko Imajyo2 · Kenji Ishikawa1 · Rao Tummala3 · Masaru Hori1 Received: 30 December 2018 / Accepted: 16 April 2019 / Published online: 20 April 2019 © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2019 Abstract A three-dimensional (3D) glass integrated passive device (IPD) is an evolutionally advanced configuration to dramatically reduce the electronics form factor and manufacturing cost of current IPDs by introducing ultra-thin glass with through- glass-vias (TGVs). A defect-free TGV formation technology in polymer-laminated glass substrates is required to realize a highly reliable 3D glass IPD. This paper discusses mechanisms of each defect formation in the use of several types of lasers to explore suitable technology for defect-free drilling in polymer-laminated glass. 1 Introduction Integrated passive device (IPD) is a key technology enabling handheld wireless devices to further decrease in size and cost and increase in functionality by integrating high density passive elements (resistors, inductors, capacitors) on sub- strates [1–3]. Silicon is a common IPD substrate material, but it is difficult to achieve a high quality factor for IPDs on silicon due to the high electrical loss of the material [4]. Moreover, the high costs associated with the materials and processing of wafer-based thin-film technology is one of the biggest challenges of silicon-based IPDs. On the other hand, IPDs on glass, which is an insulator, offer excellent electri- cal properties, enabling the design of passive components with a higher quality factor [5]. However, current glass IPDs are based on single-sided wafer-based thin-film technology, similar to silicon-based IPDs, and use thick glass substrates that are ground at the end of the process. Therefore, there are limitations to the resulting manufacturing cost reduction and miniaturization. The concept of using 3D glass IPDs in further minia- turization and manufacturing cost reduction has been put forth by Georgia Tech [6, 7]. The concept involves the use of 100–200 μm ultra-thin glass panels which can omit the grinding process, and a substrate-based double-sided pro- cess for manufacturing cost reduction. Furthermore, through glass vias (TGVs) have been implemented in ultra-thin glass to interconnect passives on both sides of the substrate to enable size reduction. For the realization of the concept, handling of ultra-thin glass panels and defect-free TGV formation are critical chal- lenges. There was a proposal to handle the ultra-thin glass panels laminating a polymer film on both sides of a glass panel [7]. As a polymer-laminated glass is comprised of several dif- ferent materials, the drilling of vias is more difficult than in a single material. For example, if the glass-polymer interface suffers damage during the drilling process, stress concen- tration or the intrusion of chemicals can occur in the area, leading to defects such as polymer delamination during post- processing. Thus, a TGV formation method that causes less damage not only to each material but also to the interfaces is essential for high reliability and a key remaining challenge to address. A variety of methods has been developed and employed for glass micro-drilling, including mechanical methods, wet etching, dry etching, and lasers [8, 9]. Mechanical meth- ods such as sandblasting and ultrasonic drilling have dif- ficulty forming vias less than 100 μm in diameter, because they tend to generate micro-cracks or chipping around the vias [10, 11]. For wet or dry etching, the etch rate differ- ence between glass and polymer is extremely challenging, making simultaneous drilling in glass and polymer difficult * Yoichiro Sato sato.youichiro@h.mbox.nagoya‑u.ac.jp 1 Nagoya University, Furo‑cho, Chikusa, Nagoya, Aichi 464‑8601, Japan 2 AGC Inc., 1‑5‑1 Marunouchi, Chiyoda, Tokyo 100‑8405, Japan 3 Georgia Institute of Technology, 813 Ferst Drive NW, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA

[PAGE 2] 10184 Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics (2019) 30:10183–10190 1 3 [12–14]. Therefore, this study focuses on the simultaneous laser drilling of holes less than 100 μm in diameter in glass and polymer. Glass generally has low absorption in the visible range. Laser drilling preferably uses the infrared or ultraviolet range for efficiency [15, 16]. For drilling in polymer-lami- nated glass, we investigated several lasers: a ­CO2 laser in the infrared range, UV-YAG lasers with excitation wavelengths of 355 nm and 266 nm, and an ArF excimer laser in the ultraviolet. Even in the visible range, ultrashort-pulse lasers such as picosecond or femtosecond lasers can enhance the absorption into glass due to multiphoton absorption, while minimizing thermal damage due to the non-thermal process- ing [17]. However, the photoexcited region by being irra- diated with the ultra-short pulse generates a strong stress wave, leading to the occurrence of microscopic cracks at the sidewall of a generated via [18, 19]. Thus, it’s difficult to achieve highly reliable via formation into glass using these ultra-short pulse laser, and we excluded the lasers in the present research. This study is divided into four sections; Sect. 2 describes the experimental methods and materials employed in drill- ing experiments using the above lasers, Sect. 3 presents the results, and Sect. 4 discusses defect-free drilling in polymer- laminated glass based on the experimental results. 2 Materials and methods 2.1 Polymer‑laminated glass The lamination of a thermoset polymer film on a glass sur- face generates compressive stress in the surface region of the glass due to cure shrinkage and the thermal shrinkage of the polymer film, strengthening the glass. Furthermore, the polymer film helps protect the glass [7]. Another benefit to have a polymer film on glass is metallization. Electroless copper plating is a conventional metallization-processing for printed circuit board (PCB) manufacturing. However, elec- troless copper deposition on glass is a significant challenge due to the extreme flatness and the chemistry of glass surface [20]. The polymer film serves as adhesion layer by forming mechanical anchoring to electroless copper. Whereas polymer-laminated glass offers several advan- tages as discussed above, this configuration makes drilling vias in the substrate even more difficult, and defect-free for- mation in polymer-laminated glass remains a key challenge. Alkali-free glass (AGC Inc., EN-A1) was used because of its excellent electrical performance and highly mechani- cal strength in high mass-productivity [21]. After cleaning the glass substrate with acetone, IPA, and deionized water, a thermoset dielectric polymer film (either ZEONIF ZS-100 from Zeon Chemicals or RXP4 from Rogers Corporation) was laminated on the surface of the glass substrate at tem- peratures ranging from 180 to 240 °C, depending on the polymer film, to fabricate the polymer-laminated glass [22]. 2.2 Laser drilling in polymer‑laminated glass 2.2.1 CO2 laser Infrared ­CO2 laser drilling is a conventional technology for via formation on printed circuit boards (PCBs) [23]. Kat- sura et al. demonstrated 25-μm-diameter via formation in 100-μm-thick bare glass using a high-peak-power pulsed ­CO2 laser [24]. They also reported that the laser system equipped with a galvanometer mirror scanner was capable of drilling up to 200 vias per second, even in glass. Mitsubishi Electric’s ­CO2 laser drilling system, GTW4, equipped with a high-peak-power pulsed ­CO2 laser with a 9.3 μm wavelength was tested for drilling polymer-laminated glass [25]. A 20-μm-thick ZS-100 film laminated on both sides of a 100-μm-thick EN-A1 glass was used in this exper- iment as a representative polymer-laminated glass. 2.2.2 UV lasers Ultraviolet (UV) lasers have smaller spot size than ­CO2 lasers, enabling smaller via formation. Thus, they are replac- ing ­CO2 lasers as the micro via size on PCBs decreases [23]. Moreover, their higher photon energy increases the contri- bution of the ablation process to drilling. This should help mitigate the thermal damage caused by laser drilling. The third and fourth harmonics of a Nd:YAG laser (355 nm and 266 nm) were tested to drill a 180-μm thick EN-A1 glass substrate with a 20-μm-thick RXP4 film on both sides. 2.2.3 ArF excimer laser The laser emission wavelength of an ArF excimer laser is 193 nm, which is the shortest wavelength of the tested lasers. The absorption ratio is higher at this short wavelength, moreover reduced thermal damage was expected because of the highly efficient ablation process [26, 27]. One drawback of the excimer laser is its lower pulse repetition frequency compared to ­CO2 and UV lasers, resulting in a slower drill- ing speed. A mask projection system, as illustrated in Fig. 1, can be used due to its low spatial coherence, enabling the simultaneous drilling of multiple holes. This improves pro- ductivity and optimizes the location of the via array. The laser system equipped with an ArF excimer laser, LPXpro 220 from Coherent, had a reduction ratio of 1/10 and the mask was designed to 60 μm in diameter on the sam- ple plane. This system was applied to form an 8 × 8 array of vias over an area of 1 mm2 simultaneously. A 20-μm-thick

[PAGE 3] 10185 Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics (2019) 30:10183–10190 1 3 RXP4 film laminated on a 180-μm-thick EN-A1 glass was used as the polymer-laminated glass. Table 1 shows the specifications and parameters of each laser drilling tested this time. 2.3 Metallization on TGVs As glass vias need to be filled with conductive materi- als after via formation, compatibility with metallization processing is also an essential factor to consider in select- ing the most suitable via formation method. Thus, metal- lization processing was implemented on each glass via sample in this study. A polymer-laminated glass with vias was first subjected to a desmear process to remove debris from laser drilling and also roughen the polymer surface, thereby enhancing the seed layer adhesion. Electroless copper plating with palladium catalyzed was carried out to deposit around 0.4 μm thick of a seed layer both over the surface of polymer and inside the vias. Subsequently pho- tolithography using a dry-film resist was implemented for copper patterning on the surface, followed by electrolytic plating to deposit about 10 μm thick copper on the desired areas. Finally the seed layer was etched for surface wiring (Semi-Additive Process). 3 Results 3.1 CO2 laser Figure 2a and b show top views of drilled vias on the laser incident and exit sides, respectively, and Fig. 3a shows a cross-sectional view of the via after electroless and electrolytic plating were carried out for metallization to observe the effects caused by the post processing. As shown in Figs. 2a and 3a, the openings in the polymer layer on the laser incident side had been extended to a diameter of approximately 120 μm, while the openings in the glass were approximately 75 μm. This was prob- ably due to differences in the laser ablation efficiency; the polymer has much higher ablation efficiency than glass. By taking a close look at Fig. 3a, the heat-affected zone along the via-sidewall can be observed, and cracks can be observed at the border, as shown in Fig. 3b. Fig. 1 Optical configuration of the excimer laser mask projection sys- tem Table 1 Specifications and parameters of each laser drilling Type CO2 laser UV lasers ArF excimer laser Model GTW4 from Mitsubishi Electric Nd:YAG lasers at Micron Laser Technology LPXpro 220 from Coherent Wavelength 9.3 μm 355 nm or 266 nm 193 nm Pulse width 1–5 μs 20–30 ns 20–30 ns Drilling process Percussion drilling with multiple pulses, one-by-one drilling Percussion drilling with multiple pulses, one- by-one drilling Percussion drilling with multiple pulses, multi via drilling by mask projection system Fig. 2 Top-view optical images of vias drilled by the ­CO2 laser: a laser-incident side, and b laser-exit side

[PAGE 4] 10186 Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics (2019) 30:10183–10190 1 3 3.2 UV lasers Figure 4a, b, and c show top views of vias drilled by a 355 nm UV laser on the incident side and the exit side, and a cross-sectional view of the via after metallization, respec- tively. As shown in Fig. 4a and c, the opening in the polymer was enlarged to over 150 μm, while the glass opening was approximately 100 μm, indicating a similar tendency to that of the ­CO2 laser. Meanwhile, unlike the ­CO2 laser sample, no cracking was observed around the via, so UV laser drill- ing appears to cause less thermal damage. On the other hand, the opening in the glass at the exit side was approximately 50 μm, but the surrounding polymer was visibly deteriorated over a large area, as shown in Fig. 4b. In Fig. 4c, the copper penetrating the interface at the exit side can be observed, indicating that delamination of the polymer had occurred. Next, the laser exit side of vias drilled using a 266 nm UV laser are shown in Fig. 5. As with the vias drilled using the 355 nm UV laser, some damage in the polymer is observable around the vias, suggesting that the polymer had delami- nated from the glass. The emergence of such deterioration and delamination was observed during laser irradiation, even before complete penetration. 3.3 ArF excimer laser Figure 6a and b show vias drilled using an ArF excimer laser on the laser-incident side and laser-exit side respectively. The optical system provided a 60-μm-diameter image of the top surface of the sample, but the resulting via diameter was approximately 60–65 μm on the incident side and 30–35 μm on the exit side. Figure 6c shows a cross-sectional view of Fig. 3 Cross-sectional view of a via drilled by ­CO2 laser after metallization: a overall view, b magnified view of the crack along the via Fig. 4 Vias drilled by UV laser (355 nm): a top view on the laser incident side, b top view on the laser exit side, c cross-sectional view after metallization Fig. 5 Top view of vias drilled by UV laser (266 nm) on the laser exit side

[PAGE 5] 10187 Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics (2019) 30:10183–10190 1 3 the vias after metallization. The via was very sharp and tapered, and no heat-affected zone is visible, unlike the ­CO2 laser drilled vias. Furthermore, the polymer damage on the laser exit side that was visible in the UV laser drilled vias was not observed when using the ArF excimer laser. 4 Discussion: defect‑free drilling Based on the experimental results of drilling in polymer- laminated glass using each laser in the previous section, this section discusses the most suitable laser drilling method for polymer-laminated glass. 4.1 CO2 laser Cracks were observed around vias drilled using the ­CO2 laser. These seem to be caused by internal stresses in the glass caused by local melting under the laser irradiation fol- lowed by rapid solidification. ­CO2 laser drilling is a thermal process, so the generation of internal stress around vias is inevitably caused by rapid local heating and cooling. Even if no crack emerges immediately after the drilling process, the internal stress remains. This stress can cause crack genera- tion by any further induced stress due to post processing or environment. Such internal stress in glass can be released by annealing above the glass transition temperature [28]. How- ever, it is difficult to anneal the polymer-laminated glass, as the polymer cannot tolerate such high temperatures. There- fore, ­CO2 laser drilling was eliminated as a viable option for drilling polymer-laminated glass because of the internal stresses generated. 4.2 UV lasers Damage to the polymer on the exit side was observed around vias drilled using both the 355 nm and 266 nm UV lasers. Because the damage emerged during laser irradiation, even before complete penetration, it seems to be due to the trans- mitted laser beam causing the deterioration of the polymer at the exit side during the glass drilling, as depicted in Fig. 7a. Figure 7b shows the transmittance of EN-A1 glass versus glass thickness. The transmittance of 0.2-mm-thick glass is as high as 90% at 355 nm, indicating that a large por- tion of the laser energy passes through the glass substrate to reach the polymer at the exit side. The transmittance drasti- cally decreases below approximately 350 nm, and that of the 0.2-mm-thick glass is approximately 40% at 266 nm. Nonetheless, the laser energy reaching the polymer on the exit side seems to be sufficient to damage and deteriorate the polymer. One of solutions to mitigate the damage to the polymer seems to be drilling from both sides of a substrate, mean- ing drilling half-thickness from one side of a substrate, flip- ping it to its back and drilling remaining half-thickness from the other side. That way the laser-irradiation time from one side can be reduced by nearly half. Moreover, the damaged area can be removed by the drilling from the other side. The idea was attempted using a 355 nm UV laser and a cross- sectional view of the via is shown in Fig. 8. Although a large portion of the damaged area could be removed, a small por- tion appears to be remained. In addition it should be difficult to make vias at perfectly same location from both sides, thus the via shape becomes uneven, resulting in instability of via inductance. That is a critical issue for performance of IPDs. Therefore, drilling from single side is preferable using Fig. 6 Vias drilled by ArF excimer laser: a top view of the laser inci- dent side, b top view of the laser exit side, c cross-sectional view after metallization Fig. 7 a Conceptual diagram of damage to the polymer at the exit side. b transmittance spectrum of EN-A1 glass versus glass thickness

[PAGE 6] 10188 Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics (2019) 30:10183–10190 1 3 a laser that has higher absorption by glass to prevent damage to the polymer at the exit side. 4.3 ArF excimer laser As shown in Fig. 6, the ArF excimer laser achieved very sharp tapered vias. This is because of its short wavelength of 193 nm, which encourages efficient ablation, and its low repetition frequency, which helps prevent heat accumulation. Because light at the excitation wavelength is highly absorbed by the glass, a large portion of the laser energy is converted to internal energy in the glass by absorption, but little energy is transferred into the polymer at the exit side of the glass substrate. This absorption helps mitigate the type of severe damage to the polymer observed with UV laser drilled vias. While no damage to the glass and polymer was identi- fied after the drilling and metallization process, delamina- tion of the polymer was observed around the TGVs on the exit side after the sample was subjected to 1572 of thermal cycling from − 55 to 125 °C, according to scanning acoustic microscope images, as shown in Fig. 9a. The delamination occurred only on the exit side, as illustrated in Fig. 9b. As no delamination occurred before the thermal cycle testing (TCT), a very slight transmitted laser beam or an impact of the laser ablation may have deteriorated the adhesion of the polymer, leading to the occurrence of the delamination by accumulated internal stress during the TCT. To enhance the adhesion of the polymer to the glass, a pretreatment using a silane coupling agent was attempted. In view of the polymer content, (3-aminopropyl) trimeth- oxysilane (APTMS) was coated onto the glass prior to the Fig. 8 Cross-sectional view of vias by a 355 nm UV laser from both sides Fig. 9 a Acoustic microscopy image of the sample after the TCT. b schematic diagram of the polymer delamination Fig. 10 a Schematic diagram of SAICAS measurement, b com- parison of the adhesive strength of the polymer film on the glass substrate between with and without the silane pretreatment Fig. 11 Acoustic microscopy image of a TGV sample pretreated with the silane coupling agent, obtained after 1015 cycles