[PAGE 1] DOI: 10.1007/s00339-004-2547-8 Appl. Phys. A 79, 605–612 (2004) Materials Science & Processing Applied Physics A d.j. hwang t.y. choi c.p. grigoropoulosu Liquid-assisted femtosecond laser drilling of straight and three-dimensional microchannels in glass Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1740, USA Received: 9 December 2003/Accepted: 15 December 2003 Published online: 23 March 2004 • © Springer-Verlag 2004 ABSTRACT Ultra-short-pulse lasers have proved to be effect- ive tools for micromachining a wide range of materials. When the ultra-short laser pulse is focused inside the bulk of a trans- parent medium, nonlinear absorption occurs only near the focal volume that is subjected to high intensity. Three-dimensional structures can be fabricated inside transparent materials by taking advantage of this volumetric absorption. In this paper, femtosecond laser pulses were used to fabricate straight and bent through-channels. Drilling was initiated from the rear sur- face to preserve consistent absorption of the laser pulse. When the debris was not removed efﬁciently, variation of the channel diameter and occasional termination of the drilling process were observed. Machining in the presence of a liquid and additional use of ultrasonic wave agitation facilitated the debris ejection. The machined channels had diameters on the order of tens of microns, high aspect ratios, and good wall-surface quality. PACS 42.62.Cf; 42.65.Re; 81.05.Kf; 43.35.+d 1 Introduction Recently, much attention has been paid to micro- fabrication of transparent materials by ultra-short laser pulses. When a highly intense ultra-short laser beam is focused inside the bulk of a transparent material, only the localized region in the neighborhood of the focal volume absorbs laser energy by nonlinear optical breakdown, leaving the rest of the target spe- cimen unaffected [1]. Taking advantage of this volumetric ab- sorption, many applications have been investigated, including three-dimensional optical storage [2], fabrication of optical waveguides [3, 4], three-dimensional structuring by photo- polymerization [5, 6], and three-dimensional drilling [7]. Fab- rication of microchannels has received much attention due to applications in microﬂuidic devices for liquid or gas chro- matography, electrophoresis, microreactors, and micro-Total Analysis System (micro-TAS) systems [8]. Crystalline sili- con has been used for these applications due to the highly developed batch-fabrication technology. However, because of the silicon optical opacity in the UV/visible range, transpar- entmaterials such as glass, quartz, and some organic polymers u Fax: +1-510/642-6163, E-mail: cgrigoro@me.berkeley.edu have been investigated as alternatives [8–11]. High aspect ratio micro via-channels in glass are frequently required [12]. In practice, this is difﬁcult to achieve by traditional techniques because brittle structure and poor thermal conductivity of the glass cause an abundance of cracks and frequently redeposi- tion occurs on the machined walls or the sample surface. In this study, drilling of glass is performed via ablative ma- terial removal [13]. Laser energy is ﬁrst absorbed in the glass through opticalbreakdown processes. Seed electrons supplied mainly from nonlinear multi-photon absorption can absorb more laser energy, increasing the number of excited elec- trons in an avalanche process. Consequently, dense plasma is formed near the laser focal volume. Possible paths of energy release are plasma photon emission, shock-wave emission due to the adiabatic plasma expansion, and electron-energy transport to the solid lattice that is followed by heat conduc- tion. A number of studies on the ablation mechanisms by ultra-short laser pulses have been reported. Spinodal decom- position and explosive boiling have been identiﬁed as dom- inant thermal mechanisms as the lattice temperature builds up. Coulomb explosion has been suggested as a nonthermal mechanism in the ablation of dielectric materials [14]. Optical breakdown in liquids is usually analyzed by invoking the anal- ogy to an amorphous solid state [15]. Laser-induced liquid ablation presents unique features with respect to the release of acoustic transients and the growth and collapse of cavitation bubbles [16]. By taking advantage of the volumetric absorp- tion of femtosecond laser radiation, drilling with a tightly focused beamcan commence fromthe rear surface of the glass sample. When femtosecond laser pulses are irradiated on the front surface of a solid sample in ambient air, strongly ex- cited electrons are emitted from the surface within a very short time (∼fs) and interact with air molecules near the surface, triggering a surface electron-initiated air plasma [17]. This plasma may eventually impede the expansion of the ablated material plume at longer time scales (∼10–100 ps). Higher pulse energy is then required for machining and the drilled channels exhibit an unacceptably high number of crack de- fects [18]. When the laser beam is focused through the bulk sample onto the rear surface, the air plasma is much weaker, easing the expansion of the ablated material plume from the machined spot [19–21]. The coupling of successive pulses through the cavity varies during machining via the front sur- face. On the contrary, when drilling begins from the rear sur-

[PAGE 2] 606 Applied Physics A – Materials Science & Processing Hole Maximum aspect ratio Processing Mass Note diameter (depth/diameter) speed production Mechanical drilling >=∼150 µm 4−14 slow no UKAM Industrial [23] Dry etching (DRIE) >=∼1 µm 30 20 µm/min yes Alcatel vacuum technology [21] Ultrasonic Machining coupled with EDM 150 µm 3−4 8–9 µm/min no Yeo et al., 2002 [25] Micro-Sandblasting 50 µm-mm 5−10 4–110 µm/s yes Belloy et al., 2002 [26] Laser (Selective etching) 25 µm 40 10 µm/s yes Forturanglass [27] Laser (liquid assisted) ∼5–70 µm 40−50 30 µm/s no used in this paper TABLE 1 Comparison of microscale glass drilling techniques face and the laser beam is properly translated towards the front surface, the process entails consistent repetition of volumet- ric absorption. Li et al. introduced distilled water in contact with the rear surface of the glass [7]. This effort was focused on drilling channels of small diameter (∼5 µm) and high as- pect ratio (∼50 : 1) at the expense of relatively low processing speeds (∼0.3 µm/s). Typical glass-drilling rates by conven- tional mechanical techniques are on the order of µm/s or much smaller, while aspect ratios exceeding 1 : 30 are difﬁcult to achieve [22]. Several methods for microscale glass machin- ing are summarized in Table 1. As will be shown in this paper, the liquid-assisted drilling process can be further enhanced by ultrasonic wave agita- tion. Channels of tens of µm’s in diameter, of up to ∼40 : 1 aspect ratio, are fabricated in 1.25 mm-thick optical glasses with speeds up to ∼30 µm/s. Straight and bent microchan- nels having high aspect ratios and smooth machined walls are produced. No additional steps such as etching or cleaning are required, nor are toxic chemicals used. Furthermore, the method avoids multiple bonding steps that are heavily utilized in planar microfabrication technology [8]. Another advantage of this method is the ability to fabricate waveguides, merely by reducing the laser pulse energy without changing the process- ing setup. This is advantageous for the fabrication of microﬂu- idic devices combined with optical detection modules [28]. 2 Experimental setup Figure 1a shows the schematic diagram of the ex- perimentalsystemfor glass drilling. Femtosecond laser pulses with a temporal width of about 100 fs (FWHM), 800-nm wavelength, 1-kHz repetition rate, and pulse energies ranging from 3 to 33 µJ were used. The applied intensity levels were substantially higher than the respective ablation threshold of bulk glass, since the main objective of this work is to achieve reasonable processing speeds for channels of tens of microns in cross-sectional diameter. Container walls (ﬂuorometer or cuvette, Starna Cell, Inc.) made from optical glass were used as target samples as shown in Fig. 1b. The laser beam was ﬁrst focused into the liquid by a long working distance (19.5 mm) objective lens (×50, NA = 0.42). Drilling begun from the rear surface that is in contact with liquid and progressed by scan- ning the focal point at constant speed towards the front surface using a motorized microstage. Three-dimensional channels were fabricated by combining the transverse, X–Y motion of the sample with the Z motion of the objective lens. In order to in-situ monitor the drilling process and visualize the debris ejection from the machined channel, transmission side-view images of the drilling process were captured by a × 5 objec- FIGURE 1 Schematics of a the drilling process, b the in-situ monitoring system FIGURE 2 sequence of femtosecond laser pulses utilized for drilling tive lens coupled to a zoomlens and a high-speed CCD camera (1000 frames/s). Two light sources were used for illumina- tion. When it was necessary to block the bright, wide-band plasma emission generated by the ablation, the frequency- doubled (400-nm wavelength) femtosecond probe beam was used as illumination source, with a narrow-band pass ﬁlter placed in front of the ×5 objective lens. Otherwise, a halo- gen lamp was used for visualizing the liquid and bubble mo-

[PAGE 3] HWANG et al. Liquid-assisted femtosecond laser drilling of straight and three-dimensional microchannels in glass 607 FIGURE 3 Comparison of dril- led holes fabricated a in air and b in contact with distilled water for two different scan- ning speeds. Femtosecond laser pulses of 33-µJ pulse energy were applied at 1 kHz FIGURE 4 Drilled hole a ﬁlled with liquid, b empty. Femtosec- ond laser pulses of 33-µJ pulse energy were applied at 1 kHz and 2-µm/s scanning speed tion inside the machined channel, since coherent light sources tend to generate complex background diffraction patterns. In- tensely bright plasma emission by laser shots of 1-kHz repe- tition rate can be superposed on the transmission images cap- tured by the CCD camera (1000-frames/s maximum frame rate). Hence, 1-kHz repetition rate laser pulses were applied over the temporal interval t2 and blocked by a mechanical shutter during the period t1 −t2 (Fig. 2). 3 Results and discussion 3.1 Straight-channel drilling Figure 3a shows holes drilled in glass in ambientair with a continuous train of pulses of 33-µJ energy. The process terminated with the drilling depth limited to 100–200 µm due to accumulation of debris and redeposition of ablated mate- rial. On the contrary, deeper through-holes could be fabricated under the same laser conditions but with the target specimen in contact with water as shown in Fig. 3b. The machined chan- nel appeared bright when ﬁlled with liquid and dark when empty (Fig. 4), verifying that through-channels transporting liquid were made. The liquid assists the drilling process, since the debris is efﬁciently carried through the drilled channel. The strong plasma expansion due to glass ablation that is com- bined with phase change in the liquid supplies the driving force for debris expulsion. It is also conceivable that the pres- sure released during the collapse of cavitating bubbles may boost the debris ejection [29]. Figure 5 depicts straight holes drilled in contact with li- quid, together with images of the entrance and exit openings. Tests using distilled water and methanol were successful. In the case of isopropanol (ISA), the drilled holes were not uni- form and the process terminated earlier. Figures 6 and 7 show several in-situ snapshot images as the drilling depth increases. The dark segments correspond to the herein referred to ‘bub- bles’ that are composed of vapor and trapped gases, mixed with ablated glass debris. During the initial stage of drilling, bubbles were readily ejected from the channel, forming a fast jet as shown in Fig. 6a. This jet leaves behind a dark bub- ble trace that bends upward due to buoyancy. As the drilled depth increases, the momentum of the jet decreases as shown in Fig. 6b–d due to the higher viscous loss experienced in- side the longer channel. Subsequent pulses could not remove the residual bubble mixture completely. Consequently, the amount of residual bubbles increased with the drilled depth. This buildup of residual bubbles and the increased viscous FIGURE 5 Straight holes drilled in contact with different liquids by fem- tosecond laser pulses of 33-µJ pulse energy at 1-kHz frequency. The mi- croscopic cross-sectional images (transmission images) depict the scanning speed variation effects loss stall the ejection momentum. When the kinetic energy of the bubble is insufﬁcient for overcoming the resistance that is mainly exerted by surface tension, a bubble is trapped near the entrance as shown in Fig. 6e. To detach itself, this bubble has to grow until the buoyancy force becomes large enough to bal- ance the vertical component of the surface-tension-induced resistance force. Trapped bubble remnants inside the channel and near the entrance signiﬁcantly degrade drilling uniformity as the channel diameter increases. At the same time, the depth progression becomes more difﬁcult. Once the ejection process

[PAGE 4] 608 Applied Physics A – Materials Science & Processing FIGURE 6 Snapshots of bubble traces emerging from a channel that is machined in contact with methanol as the drilled depth increases. Fem- tosecond laser pulses of 33-µJ pulse energy were applied at 1-kHz repeti- tion rate and 2-µm/s scanning speed. On the right-hand side of the vertical line is glass and on the left methanol FIGURE 7 In-situ side-view imaging snapshots of drilling process for dif- ferent liquids (t1 = 200 ms, t2 = 50 ms, 33-µJ pulse energy, 2-µm/s scanning speed). Dark spots indicate debris aggregates and bright spots liquid-ﬁlled areas FIGURE 8 Enhancement of drilling performance by applying waiting times between series of pulses. Variation of t2 for t1 = 200 ms (5 Hz). A time interval t2 = 200 ms means continuous 1-kHz laser pulses without waiting times. The machining is done in contact with ISA, at the scanning speed of 2 µm/s and with 33-uJ pulse energy becomes inefﬁcient, bubbles and debris build up, eventually leading to early termination of drilling. The debris ejection is more difﬁcult for higher-viscosity liquids (e.g. ISA) as shown in Fig. 7c, but water (Fig. 7a) or methanol (Fig. 7b) yielded decentresults. The diameter of the drilled channel was noticed to change when the debris/bubble ejection was inefﬁcient (Fig. 7a). On the contrary, the entire channel ﬁlled quickly with residual bubbles in the case of the highly viscous ISA. The trapped ‘entrance’ bubbles (Fig. 7c) produced irregular cross-sectional shapes and dead-end holes. Summarizing, vi- sualization of bubble motion veriﬁed that (a) efﬁcient removal of debris is critical and (b) the use of liquids having lower viscosity is advantageous. Effects of other properties (optical, FIGURE 9 Snapshot of the debris-ejection process with and without ultrasonic waves. The machining is done in contact with methanol with t1 = 200 ms, t2 = 20 ms, 33-µJ pulse energy, 2-µm/s scanning speed ﬂuidic–mechanical, thermodynamic, and chemical) are still under investigation. Application of waiting times between the laser pulses (t1 −t2) improved the drilling performance in the case of ISA as shown in Fig. 8. Continuous 1-kHz operation (t1 = t2) pro- duces more vapor bubbles, reducing the debris-ejection efﬁ- ciency. By imposing a waiting time of t1 −t2 after irradiating a train of laser shots for a time length t2, the amount of gener- ated bubbles is reduced, allowing time for bubble ejection and detachment. A lower number of shots (shorter t2) decreased the channel diameter. Similarly, a higher scanning speed pro- duced smaller-diameter holes as shown in Fig. 5. Ideally, the laser focal point should be exactly on the liquid/glass inter- face. However, this is practically difﬁcult to control. In the case of high scanning speeds, the interface lags behind the moving laser focal spot and drilling may eventually stop. On the contrary, in the case of a too slow scanning speed, the deposited laser beam produces excessive heat and vapor in- hibiting the ejection of debris. This is the reason why the maximum drilling depth does not monotonically increase as the scanning speed decreases (Fig. 5). 3.2 Enhancement of straight-hole drilling by ultrasonic waves As described in Sect. 3.1, efﬁcient debris ejection is critical in the glass-drilling process. Bubbles remaining in- side the channel as well as the lingering surface bubble near the entrance degrade and even cause termination of drilling. In order to solve this problem, ultrasonic waves were ap- plied by installing a commercial ultrasonic cleaner beneath the glass container as shown in Fig. 1a. Methanol was cho- sen for this experiment, since drilling in methanol had already yielded reasonable results and because it is appropriate for generating microcavitation bubbles. Since glass is a good con- ductor of ultrasonic waves, they can easily couple with the liquid inside the container. The negative pressure driven by ultrasonic waves generates many tiny cavitation bubbles. As these cavitation bubbles collapse, they release high-frequency energy [30], which detaches trapped bubbles near the en- trance of the machined hole. Furthermore, the frequentgrowth and collapse of cavitation bubbles cause pressure ﬂuctuations

[PAGE 5] HWANG et al. Liquid-assisted femtosecond laser drilling of straight and three-dimensional microchannels in glass 609 FIGURE 10 The top in-situ images compare the trapped bubble behav- ior with and without ultrasonic wave agitation. The images below are post- processing transmission images of the drilled hole FIGURE 11 Comparison of drilling results without and with ultrasonic wave agitation. 1-kHz repetition rate femtosecond laser pulses were fo- cused into glass in contact with methanol that scrape residual bubble mixtures from the channel cav- ity. Figure 9 shows a snapshot of the drilling process without and with ultrasonic waves, which was captured by a CCD at 1000-frames/s rate. Bubbles (depicted as dark spots due to light scattering) tend to remain inside the channel if no ul- trasonic waves are applied. However, periodic ejection bursts were observed when the ultrasonic transducer was turned on. In pulsed operation of commercial ultrasonic cleaners, the ul- trasonic energy is turned on and off at a rate that may vary from once every several seconds to several hundred times per second in order to (a) avoid damage of either the transducer or the sample by standing waves and (b) to degas trapped air [30]. Images at 1000 fps show that bubble ejection oc- curs with a period on the order of 100 Hz, which is close to the on–off frequency of the ultrasonic transducer. Figure 10 shows a persistent bubble near the entrance of the machined hole when no ultrasonic waves were used and early termina- tion of the drilled hole. On the contrary, no such effects were observed in ultrasonic wave-assisted machining. Additional examples are shown in Fig. 11 for pulse energies of 3.3 µJ and 6.7 µJ, verifying that signiﬁcantly (in excess of 20 times) deeper holes can be obtained. Aspect ratios of drilled holes (depth/diameter) increased to about 40 : 1, while the diameter uniformity improved. Measured depth and diameter (from Fig. 13) are plotted in Fig. 12. 3.3 Three-dimensional channeling Superposition of sample translation along the X and/or Y directions on the Z motion of the focal spot en- ables machining of three-dimensional through-channels of arbitrary shape. Drilling of bent holes again started from the rear surface of a glass plate that is in contact with liquid. Figure 13 shows a45◦bentchannelthatwas machined by sim- ultaneously moving the focal spot of 1-kHz laser pulses in the Z direction and the sample in the Y (vertical) direction. By comparing images of ﬁlled (Fig. 13a) versus empty channels (Fig. 13b), itis inferred thatthrough-channels were machined. A defect line branched from the main channel, as better seen in the magniﬁed view of Fig. 13c and d. When a highly in-

[PAGE 6] 610 Applied Physics A – Materials Science & Processing FIGURE 12 Measured diameter and depth of drilled hole corresponding to the holes shown in Fig. 11 tense laser beam of Gaussian spatial proﬁle is focused inside a transparent medium, the length of the focal spot can be much larger than the Rayleigh range due to ﬁlamentation [31]. This phenomenon is caused by the dynamic competition be- tween self-focusing due to the Kerr effect and defocusing by the generated electron plasma [32]. Upon irradiation by a highly intense beam, the Kerr effect(i.e. intensity-dependent refractive-index change) raises the optical density (i.e. the value of the refractive index) near the peak of the Gaussian laser beam. The ensuing self-focusing is countered by the defocusing effect of the electron plasma that is generated via the breakdown process. Hence, the ﬁlamentation-zone length approximately determines the extent of the damage region [33]. However, the self-focused laser beam should di- verge upon intercepting the channel cavity because of the lower refractive index of the empty or partially ﬁlled by liquid/bubbles channel cavity (nglass ∼1.5, nmethanol ∼1.3, and nvapor ∼1, where n is the refractive index [34]). When the peak power of the input pulse (∼330 MW in this experi- ment) is much larger than the critical power (∼4 MW) for FIGURE 13 Bent channels ma- chined by 1-kHz femtosecond laser pulses, scanning speed 2 µm/s: a bent hole ﬁlled with liquid, b empty bent hole, c mag- niﬁed view of upward bend, d magniﬁed view of downward bend self-focusing in the transparent medium, there is still suf- ﬁciently high transmitted power to drive self-contraction, even after the loss of a substantial part of the input energy due to absorption [35]. Therefore, one of the most import- ant parameters for avoiding satellite crack damage is the relative location of the laser focal spot with respect to the glass–liquid interface that is determined by multiple fac- tors such as laser pulse energy, scanning speed, and number of pulses per unit depth of drilling. If the laser pulses are focused into the glass, the damage is conﬁned within the ma- chined channel cavity. One strategy for achieving this is to control the number of shots by adjusting the exposure and waiting time intervals. Continuous 1-kHz operation (t1 = t2) appears to be inappropriate, because the laser focal spot tends to stay within the machined cavity. Over the waiting period t1 −t2, the laser focal spot simply moves away from the channel cavity and towards the bulk. Figure 14a shows that the size of the defect line diminishes as t2 decreases. The same trend may be realized by faster scanning of the laser beam as shown in Fig. 14b and the magniﬁed image in Fig. 14c. Application of ultrasonic waves had no effect on the size of the defect line, even though it again enhanced the overall drilling performance. Simple reduction of the pulse energy was not effective either, since it yielded multiple side- microcracks. Multi-photon absorption and avalanche ioniza- tion are intensity-dependent processes. Therefore, a lower fraction of the input laser energy will be absorbed in the glass and within the focal volume. Correspondingly, a rela- tively larger pulse energy portion will be refocused past the main channel to produce defects. Optimized bent holes are demonstrated in Fig. 15, including sharper channel angles and curved holes. The magniﬁed view reveals minimal transverse damage. 4 Summary and future work Femtosecond laser pulses of 800-nm wavelength were used to fabricate straight holes of high aspect ratio (up to ∼40 : 1). The drilling started at the rear surface and in contact with a liquid in order to facilitate the ablated debris