[PAGE 1] 1 Near-unity broadband omnidirectional emissivity via femtosecond laser surface processing *Andrew Reicks1, Alfred Tsubaki1, Mark Anderson2, Jace Wieseler2, Larousse Khosravi Khorashad1, Jeffrey E. Shield2, George Gogos2, Dennis Alexander1, *Christos Argyropoulos1, and *Craig Zuhlke1 1 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 1400 R St. Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, USA 2 Department of Mechanical & Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 1400 R St. Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, USA Abstract It is very challenging to achieve near perfect absorption/emission that is both broadband and omnidirectional while utilizing a scalable fabrication process. Femtosecond laser surface processing is an emerging low-cost and large-scale manufacturing technique used to directly and permanently modify the surface properties of a material. The versatility of this technique to produce tailored surface properties has resulted in a rapidly growing number of applications. Here, we demonstrate near perfect, broadband, omnidirectional emissivity from aluminum surfaces by tuning the laser surface processing parameters including fluence, pulse count, and the ambient gas. Full-wave simulations and experimental results prove that the obtained increase in emissivity is mainly a result of two distinct features produced by femtosecond laser surface processing: the introduction of microscale surface features and the thick oxide layer. This technique leads to functionalized metallic surfaces that are ideal for emerging applications, such as passive radiative cooling and thermal management of spacecraft.

[PAGE 2] 2 Introduction Recently, a substantial amount of research efforts have focused on developing surfaces with high electromagnetic absorption or emission in the infrared (IR) regions of the electromagnetic spectrum with important applications in passive radiative cooling1–3, thermophotovoltaics4–6, and thermal management of spacecraft7–9. Typically, state-of-the-art surfaces with high electromagnetic absorption/emission can be divided into three categories: coatings and paints, metamaterials, and laser processed surfaces. Coatings and paints are similar approaches to increasing emissivity; they are utilized to add a layer or layers of a material to obtain surface properties different than those of the substrate. Coatings and paints technologies vary significantly in terms of materials, thickness, number of layers, and application method9– 17. Coatings are usually designed to utilize the emission properties of the low index material and the high absorption caused by the phonon-polariton resonance of the high index material at IR frequencies5,11,15,16. Paints can vary significantly on how the high emissivity response is achieved, however, many are based on organic compounds or oxide nanoparticles3,4,10,11,18. Coatings and paints have a number of advantages that have led to their widespread usage10,14,15, including affordability and the relative ease in which they can be applied to nearly any material. Additionally, several offer tunable absorption over most of the IR spectrum, however this is typically narrowband12,13. Coatings and paints have similar disadvantages including being prone to delamination and easy degradation with time, especially in harsh environments such as space5,7,19. Since they are relatively smooth, most suffer from high angular sensitivity9,14. Additionally, most high- emissivity coatings or paints require time to fully cure before they can be used, usually up to seven days18, and utilize toxic materials3,4,16. Recently, wide-angle, high absorption/emission responses have been demonstrated with metallic (plasmonic)20 or dielectric17,21,22 metamaterial structures. It has also been demonstrated that metallic gratings can be used to produce near perfect emissivity at a chosen wavelength and angle23. Similarly, tapered and elongated gratings can offer near perfect absorption across several angles in the visible spectrum24,25. Narrowband absorption in the IR spectrum has also been demonstrated by using different

[PAGE 3] 3 surface shapes, such as crosses, circles, and squares26–28. Using other shapes like “trapezoidal ridges” offers absorption over a broader spectral band, and the use of grids offers high absorption at a wide range of angles29. However, all of these structures result in enhanced absorption/emission over a narrow spectral band, typically over just a few micrometers. In addition, their response is always angle-dependent, and they do not operate as perfect absorbers at grazing angles. Recently, theoretical works have demonstrated tunable, near-perfect, wide-angle absorption over a variety of wavelength ranges in the IR spectrum by using alternating metal-dielectric layers and metamaterials with different surface shapes such as columns, pyramids, or trapezoidal structures30–32. Nevertheless, the experimental verification of these structures is still elusive, mainly due to the complexity of the required niche fabrication processes. Moreover, most applications of high emissivity surfaces require large area inexpensive absorbers, while most metamaterial structures can currently only be produced over extremely small areas using costly high accuracy lithographic techniques. In addition, the perfectly periodic nature required of these metamaterials is prone to fabrication imperfections, so typically high emissivity is obtained for only a narrow spectral range as compared to the broadband results that have been demonstrated using coatings or laser processing. Many previous studies have demonstrated that laser processing can be used to modify how surfaces reflect, absorb, or emit light9,15, including large increases in broadband absorption/emission on surfaces processed using short pulsed lasers. The surfaces are generally produced either by using femtosecond laser surface processing (FLSP) to form quasi-periodic self-organizing microstructures33–37 or by directly writing pattens such as a grid or array of holes onto the surface38–41. However, none of these papers report surfaces with emissivity that is near perfect, omnidirectional, and broadband. Broadband moderate absorption values have been demonstrated over a wide spectral range from 0.3 to 50 μm on aluminum processed using a femtosecond laser at relatively high fluence (13.5 J/cm2) to create quasi-periodic surface structures33. However, that work was focused on the broadband absorption of the surfaces and no work was completed to fine-tune the surfaces to maximize the emissivity. Periodic submicron ripples produced using low fluence values, known as laser induced period surface structures (LIPSS), can be used to produce high absorption

[PAGE 4] 4 in narrow bands that are tunable over a wide spectral range from 250 nm to 300 μm on aluminum36, very similar to the results demonstrated for metamaterial structures. Research on LIPSS has been expanded up to fluence values of 2.4 J/cm2 to include microscale structures on aluminum with similar narrowband absorption obtained in the limited spectral band of 0.4 to 1 μm 35. Another study of laser processed surfaces demonstrated moderately high absorption in the visible spectrum based on aluminum using quasi-periodic self-organized microstructures, in addition to increased absorption from 2.5 to 15 μm on titanium and stainless steel, but the emissivity was only measured for angles of 10, 40, and 60 degrees from the surface normal37. While these studies hypothesize that roughness and surface chemistry are possible causes for the increase in absorption on aluminum, none address these important issues experimentally. Other researchers have produced similar results with moderately high absorption at normal incidence over the visible spectrum and into the IR, out to 2.5 µm, by directly laser writing a grid pattern on copper39,40, aluminum37, and silicon38. However, these direct laser writing methods do not lead to dynamic structures in terms of high aspect ratios and roughness that can be produced by the FLSP process. As a result, these surfaces fail to produce a broadband near perfect omnidirectional response. Furthermore, the direct laser writing methods likely do not result in a thick oxide layer like the surfaces reported in this paper, because with direct writing the laser only interacts with specific parts of the surface (e.g., area within the channels). In addition, all the previous relevant studies do not include detailed materials science analysis to quantify the oxide layer thickness and formation dynamics. Many previous works reported in the literature have indicated three possible causes leading to the increase in broadband absorption of the laser processed material: addition of micro/nanoscale surface structures37,39,40,42, changes in chemistry38,42,43, and the effect of impedance matching41,43. Many of these studies examine only a single cause and most do not address aluminum. Understanding the role that both the oxide layer and surface microstructure plays in modifying surface properties requires a complete analysis of the laser processed surfaces including subsurface chemical and microstructure analysis, which are performed in this work.

[PAGE 5] 5 FLSP is an emerging advanced manufacturing technique that can be used to directly alter the properties of a surface. With FLSP, permanent multiscale surface features are produced that are typically characterized by microscale mounds, or pyramidal structures, covered by a layer of redeposited nanoparticles44–47. The resulting micro and nanoscale roughness, along with modified surface chemistry and subsurface microstructure, accounts for the unique properties attributed to these surfaces. These features form through a unique combination of ablation, redeposition, melting, fluid flow and resolidification48. The surface morphology and chemistry can be directly controlled by processing parameters such as fluence, the number of pulses applied, and the atmospheric environment present when processing the surface49,50. The versatility of FLSP for producing tailored surface properties results in a wide range of applications, including improved anti-bacterial response51–53, modified wettability54,55, enhanced heat transfer properties56,57, and tunable electromagnetic response33,35,36. In this work, we theoretically and experimentally demonstrate, for the first-time, near perfect hemispherical emissivity in the spectral range from 7.5 to 14 μm, exhibited by aluminum surfaces processed using FLSP within an air environment. Emissivity was measured over this spectral range because it is an atmospheric window of interest for many thermal management applications and is the range of operation of the thermal camera used for the measurements. The developed FLSP surfaces outperform the emissivity response of all coatings and metamaterial structures presented in the literature. Furthermore, the FLSP technique has many advantages over other surface functionalization techniques: it results in a fully functionalized surface in a single processing step; it is a scalable process; it involves the creation of hierarchical micro and nanoscale surface features composed of the original material, making the surface highly permanent; it leads to modification of the original surface without the net addition of mass; and it results in a minimized heat affected zone, so the surface can be modified without altering the bulk properties of the material58. We use experimental and theoretical insights to prove that both surface oxidation and microscale surface features play key roles in the large emissivity increase. A detailed surface and subsurface analysis of chemistry, porosity, and microstructure enables the complete characterization of the FLSP surfaces and provides inputs

[PAGE 6] 6 to the performed theoretical modeling of light scattering from these surfaces. The laser processed surfaces produced are ideal candidates to be used as a permanent solution to achieve passive radiative cooling of large area metallic surfaces, thermophotovoltaics, thermal management in spacecrafts, and energy absorption for laser power beaming or stealth technologies. Results Broadband and omnidirectional emissivity response. We demonstrate an omnidirectional increase in emissivity of functionalized aluminum that results in a hemispherical emissivity near the absolute maximum value of unity in the spectral range of 7.5 to 14 μm. The directional emissivity of a typical optimized FLSP surface is illustrated in Fig. 1a and c. The surface topography is shown in the three-dimensional (3D) laser scanning confocal microscope (LSCM) image and inset scanning electron microscope (SEM) image in Fig. 1b. This sample was processed in an air environment using 35 fs pulses at a 1 kHz repetition rate with a peak fluence of 2.86 J/cm2 and a pulse count of 1600. The microscale surface features typically consist of mounds with heights in the range of 80 to 90 μm. Significant variation in mound diameters are visible in the LSCM image in Fig. 1b. This variation in size is crucial to achieve the broadband high emissivity response. In order to prove that FLSP is highly repeatable to produce near perfect thermal emitters, the optimized surface was reproduced with the same laser processing parameters using two different femtosecond laser systems at three different humidity levels with constant temperature in the lab, in a total of six batches. The hemispherical emissivity (εh) value of 0.945 reported in Fig. 1a is the average εh measurement of twelve samples, two per batch. These values were accurately verified by the extensive theoretical analysis presented later in this work. More details about how the hemispherical and directional emissivities are calculated and their definitions are provided in the Supplementary Information section. The standard deviation for the hemispherical emissivity of the twelve samples is also reported in Fig. 1a. Due to the quasi-periodic self-organized nature of the resulting laser processed surface, the exact surface morphology at the microscale varies from one sample to another. However, the macroscale characteristics of the surfaces are uniform and repeatable for a given set of laser processing parameters. The emissivity