[PAGE 1] arXiv:1811.01046v1 [physics.app-ph] 24 Oct 2018 Optimization of femtosecond laser processing in liquids Jan S. Hoppius Applied Laser Technologies, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, Universit¨atsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany Stella Maragkaki Applied Laser Technologies, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, Universit¨atsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas (IESL-FORTH), 71110 Heraklion, Crete, Greece Alexander Kanitz Applied Laser Technologies, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, Universit¨atsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany Peter Gregorˇciˇc Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Aˇskerˇceva 6, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia Evgeny L. Gurevich Applied Laser Technologies, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, Universit¨atsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany Abstract In this paper we analyze femtosecond laser processing of metals in liq- uids searching for optimal conditions for predictable ablation. Incident laser pulses are stretched or compressed, self-focused and scattered on bubbles and on surface waves in the liquid environment. Inﬂuence of these eﬀects on the laser intensity distribution on the target surface is discussed and optimal processing parameters are suggested. Email addresses: hoppius@lat.rub.de (Jan S. Hoppius), gurevich@lat.rub.de (Evgeny L. Gurevich) Preprint submitted to Applied Surface Science November 6, 2018

[PAGE 2] Keywords: laser ablation in liquids, femtosecond laser, self-focusing 1. Introduction Laser material processing in a liquid environment is potentially advanta- geous with respect to the commonly used laser ablation in air due to higher processing rates, more eﬀective sample cooling and lower debris left on the surface [1, 2]. Further, a surrounding liquid changes the recoil pressure acting on the thin laser-molten layer, which inﬂuences formation of the laser-induced nanostructures [3]. Experiments with nanosecond lasers show that the abla- tion rate of solids in the water conﬁnement regime increases with respect of that in the air [4–6]. For many applications, like e.g., laser shock peening and generation of nanoparticles, the liquid environment is inevitable. Optimiza- tion of the experimental conditions such as pulse overlap and the thickness of the liquid layer increases the productivity of the nanoparticle generation in liquids. For example, maximal production rate of Al2O3 nanoparticles with infrared laser was observed to decrease with the liquid layer thickness [7]. The maximal ablation rate of silicon in water with KrF laser was observed for approximately 1.1 mm liquid depth, which can be explained by a com- promise between light absorption in the liquid and conditions for the plasma formation upon ablation [8]. Ultrafast-laser ablation in liquids is a suitable method to fabricate both nanostructures and nanoparticles in a single ex- periment, with the potential for utilizing both as surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) active elements [9]. Although liquid environment is obviously advantageous for some aspects of laser ablation, several unwelcome eﬀects appear due to using water or any other liquid as the laser processing medium. Especially for ultrashort laser pulses, which intensity is high enough to trigger nonlinear optical processes in the liquid, the interaction between the latter and the laser light becomes very complex. For example, it was shown, that already for single pulses, the used liquid has a signiﬁcant impact on the ablation eﬃciency [10]. Furthermore, the laser beam undergoes self-focusing, the pulse duration and spectrum change as well as gas bubbles born upon ablation scatter the following pulses. All these eﬀects lead to unpredictable pulse intensity and spectrum on the target surface and should be controlled to obtain reproducible experimental results. Liquid environment is also used in the LIPSS (laser-induced periodic sur- face structures) formation experiments [11–14]. In the frames of plasmonic 2

[PAGE 3] lens zf d PBS λ/2 fs-Laser S CCD Spark Figure 1: Experimental setup. Contours of the cuvette ﬁlled with the liquid are shown by thick solid lines. Thick dashed line represents the position of a thin cuvette used to analyze white light emission from diﬀerent slices of the liquid. Distance between the cuvette and the lens is d, the distance between the front side of the cuvette and the focal point is zf. model of the LIPSS formation, the refractive index of the liquid environment should control the pattern period [15], thus experiments in diﬀerent liquids could be used for an experimental test of this theory. However the broadening of the spectrum of the incident light in the liquid makes the results diﬃcult for interpretation especially due to the fact that the white light generated in a nonlinear medium can also make the LIPSS [16]. In this paper we analyze the interaction between ultrashort near-infrared laser pulses and liquids experimentally and suggest strategies to minimize these unwelcome eﬀects in order to achieve predictable beam intensity dis- tribution on the sample surface for laser processing. 2. Experimental Setup In usual experiments on laser processing in liquids, the incident laser beam is focused on the target surface immersed in water or any other liq- uid either from the top or from the side. The side geometry used in our experiments to study the self-focusing eﬀect is shown in the ﬁgure 1. Fem- tosecond (fs) laser pulses (Spitﬁre Ace fs-laser produced by Spectra Physics, λ = 800 nm, minimal pulse duration τ min p = 35 fs) are attenuated by λ/2 plate and polarizing beam splitter (PBS) and focused into a container by a convex lens (focal distance 8 cm) from the side. The walls of the cuvettes were one millimeter-thick fused silica glass slides. The container is ﬁlled with the liquid under study and contains no target in all experiments, in which only interaction between the laser radiation and the liquid are studied. The geometrical focus point is inside the liquid at the position zf measured from 3

[PAGE 4] the front wall of the container. The spectrum of the laser pulses propagating through the liquid is measured by the spectrometer (marked as S in ﬁgure 1) USB2000+ designed by Ocean Optics. The CCD video camera Point Grey produced by FLIR Integrated Imaging Solutions Inc. and the short-pulse light source (gas discharge spark, signed as Spark in ﬁg. 1) are placed in the horizontal plane in front and behind the cuvette. The imaging optics (not shown in ﬁg. 1) homogeneously illuminate the container and image it onto the CCD chip. The optical axis of the imaging system is perpendicular to the laser beam propagation direction. In the experiments on bubble formation upon ablation of solid targets im- mersed in liquids (see section 3.2), the conﬁguration is closer to the commonly- used laser ablation design: The laser beam impacts the target surface from the top, i.e., through the liquid-air interface. Tangerine femtosecond laser produced by Amplitude Systems with Ep = 15 µJ pulses stretched to τp = 1.5 ps and repetition rate 1 kHz was used in these experiments. The beam is focused on a polished copper sample, which is ablated; the position of the laser spot was moved by a Galvo-scanner SCANcube 7 designed by SCAN- LAB with the scanning speed of 180 µm/s. The position of the illumination source and the camera are the same as shown in Fig. 1. 3. Results and Discussion 3.1. Beam self-focusing A simpliﬁed picture of the focusing in liquids is that after the laser beam passes through the air-glass and glass-liquid interfaces it refracts according to the Snell’s law and the focus position changes moving slightly further inside the liquid. However, for ultrashort laser pulses this eﬀect is negligible com- paring to self-focusing [17], which shifts the focus in the opposite direction, i.e., closer to the lens. The position of the focus in the container is deﬁned by two lenses: one real lens with focal distance of 8 cm used in the exper- imental setup shown in ﬁgure 1, and one virtual lens induced in the liquid with intensity-dependent refractive index n = n0 + n2I due to the Gaussian beam proﬁle. The optical force of the second lens depends on the parameter α = p P/Pc, where P = Ep/τp is the peak power of the pulse, Ep is the pulse energy and Pc ≈0.15λ2/(n0n2) - the critical power. Calculation of zf [17–19] for commonly-used liquids and τp = 35 fs laser pulses (α ∼30000) reveals that the beam must be self-focused after several millimeters of propagation in the liquid, whereas in the experiments the self-focusing starts either on 4

[PAGE 5] Figure 2: Laser focusing in ethanol, the laser (not shown) is on the right-hand side. Pulse energy Ep = 1 mJ, wavelength λ = 800 nm. Several images corresponding to diﬀerent pulse durations are shown one above the other (from top to bottom: τp = −3000 fs, τp = −2500 fs, τp = −2000 fs, τp = −1500 fs, τp = −1000 fs, τp = −500 fs, τp = 35 fs, τp = 500 fs, τp = 1000 fs, τp = 1500 fs, τp = −3000 fs, τp = 2000 fs, τp = 2500 fs.). Each image corresponds to single femtosecond laser shot. 5

[PAGE 6] zf (mm) 0 2 4 6 8 10 τp (ps) 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 Figure 3: Dependence of the focus position in ethanol zf on the pulse duration τp for positive and negative pulse stretch measured from the images in ﬁgure 2. Dashed line is the position of the focus predicted by the equation (1). Front wall of the cuvette corresponds to zf between 0 mm and 1 mm, ﬁlaments inside the wall cannot be imaged by the optical system. the liquid interface or already inside the glass wall of the container, see dark ﬁlaments in the ﬁgure 2 for τp = 35 fs in ethanol. The onset of the ﬁlamentation immediately after the beam enters the medium makes high-power femtosecond lasers nearly useless for precise ma- terial processing in liquids. However, for a given pulse energy Ep the ﬁla- mentation onset point can be shifted deeper into the liquid by decreasing the parameter α, which can be achieved in three ways: (1) by pulse stretch- ing; (2) by changing the focusing conditions; (3) by choosing a liquid with a smaller nonlinear refractive index. 3.1.1. Pulse Stretching Stretching the pulses by deadjusting the compressor inside the femtosec- ond laser up to several picoseconds allows to shift the focus several millimeter deeper into the liquid, see ﬁgure 2. The stretch can be either positive or neg- ative, see ﬁgure 3, a small diﬀerence between them can be explained by the group velocity dispersion, which additionally compresses or stretches the laser pulses in the liquid and in the glass. In the ﬁgure 3, zf is measured as the dis- tance between the front side of the cuvette and the most right dark ﬁlament in Fig. 2. The thickness of the glass walls are approximately 1 millimeter and the nonlinear refractive index of glass nGlass 2 ≈4·10−20 m2/W [20] i.e., close to 6