[PAGE 1] Appl Phys A (2008) 93: 141–145 DOI 10.1007/s00339-008-4658-0 Optodynamic monitoring of laser micro-drilling of glass by using a laser probe Rok Petkovšek · Aleš Babnik · Janez Diaci · Janez Možina Received: 12 October 2007 / Accepted: 9 April 2008 / Published online: 31 May 2008 © Springer-Verlag 2008 Abstract We present a new method for monitoring of the laser micro-drilling process. The method is based on detec- tion of acoustic waves in air above the processed sample using a laser beam deﬂection probe (LBDP). We present an augmentation of the experimental set-up by means of a dig- ital micrographic system which enables the acquisition of images of the plasma plume and of the hole cross-section during a drilling sequence. Comparing the acquired images with the detected LBDP signals, we examine the drilling process from a new perspective. PACS 52.38.Mf · 43.35.Yb · 42.62.Cf 1 Introduction Lasers are the preferred tool for processing holes with high aspect ratios in various types of material such as metals, plastic, and different types of glass. The smallest hole di- ameters can be obtained using the percussion laser drilling method, where the hole diameter is related to the focal di- ameter of the laser beam and to the pulse energy. In such a case, a pulsed laser source is used with pulse duration of up to few ns, and drilling is realized with a sequence of laser pulses. There are drawbacks of this method such as pulse- to-pulse energy instability and variation of the laser energy conversion properties of processed sample during process- ing [1]. Using predetermined laser parameters (ﬂuence and number of pulses), it is very likely that the expected depth R. Petkovšek · A. Babnik () · J. Diaci · J. Možina Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Askerceva 6, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia e-mail: ales.babnik@fs.uni-lj.si of a blind hole cannot be obtained or the through hole di- ameter may deviate from expected value. Because of that, repeatable results can only be obtained with process mon- itoring and control. For this purpose, various monitoring techniques, which give real-time information about the laser drilling process, have been investigated. Most of such tech- niques are based on direct optical observation by using dig- ital micro-photography [2] or on detection of shock waves by various techniques such as detection by using a piezo- electric element [3], microphone [4], optical interferometer [5], shadow photography [6], or high speed camera [7]. The laser beam deﬂection method is also an important device for detection of the shock wave spreading into the surrounding atmosphere. It is used for basic study of the ablation process [8–11]. Further it was also used for the process monitoring such as determination of removal rate [1] that is based on measurement of the shock wave time of ﬂight. In our recent work, we have demonstrated that by beam deﬂection probe it is also possible to reliably detect perforation of the wall during pulsed laser micro-drilling [12] as well as to deter- mine the hole depth in real time [13]. In this contribution, we present a further investigation of the LPDB monitoring of micro-drilling which is charac- terized by three process phases [14]. Typical for the initial phase is a high removal rate and approximately semispheri- cal hole with cracked wall. The second phase is determined by approximate constant removal rate. The hole has nearly cylindrical shape, and its diameter relates to the laser beam diameter. The last phase is determined by spontaneous stop of the ablation process. During this phase, transition from nearly cylindrical to conical hole appears, which can end in a capillary hole. Real time monitoring of the phases can there- fore signiﬁcantly improve the reproducibility of the drilling process results. It is especially important in the case where a

[PAGE 2] 142 R. Petkovšek et al. Fig. 1 The experimental set-up hole with small exit diameter (in the range of few microme- ters) is required. Our method is based on an experimental system which combines the on-line LBDP detection with a digital micro- graphic imaging system. The imaging system allows the acquisition of the images of the plasma plume above the processed surface and of the drilled hole cross-section af- ter each pulse. The micrograph images are used to interpret the simultaneously acquired LBDP signals. As a result, it is shown that by observation of the signal amplitude from LBDP alone it is possible to identify three characteristic phases of the pulsed laser micro-drilling in real time. 2 Experiment A schematic diagram of the experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 1. An excimer laser, with the wavelength of 308 nm, the pulse duration of 20 ns, and the repetition rate up to 20 Hz was used as the processing laser source. The focal diameter of the beam at the processing point was 65 µm, and the nu- merical aperture was NA = 0.3. The ﬂuence of the process- ing beam in focus was in the range 16–30 J/cm2. A part of the processing beam reﬂected diffusely from the sample sur- face was detected by a fast photodiode to provide a signal for triggering the acquisition system. The drilling process was executed without an assist gas. Experiments were performed on plane glass samples (0.55 mm thick soda-lime glass). The processed surface was aligned perpendicularly to the processing beam. A custom made adjustment system [12] ensured that the processing beam focus position was repeatable within ±2 µm. Laser generated acoustic waves in air above the processed surface were detected by means of a laser-beam deﬂection probe (LBDP). The probe laser beam, which was emitted from a 5 mW He–Ne laser, was aligned perpendicularly to the processing laser beam at a constant distance D = 2 mm from the hole entrance surface and parallel to the processed surface. The deﬂection of the probe beam was detected by a position-sensing quadrant photodiode (AME type SPOT- 9DMI). A typical LBDP signal is shown in Fig. 2. A detailed explanation of the LBDP sensing method and its response can be found elsewhere [10, 11, 15]. For real-time visual observation of the cross-section of the processed hole and the plasma plume formed in the hole, we used a digital video camera (resolution 800 × 1000 pixels, acquisition rate 30 fps) with a microscope objective (100 fold magniﬁcation). The camera optical axis was ori- entated perpendicularly to the axes of the processing and probing laser beams. (It should be noted that the orienta- tion of the imaging system in Fig. 1 is not drawn to scale.) The samples were polished on the side orientated towards the camera to obtain a better image contrast. An electron- ically controlled LCD attenuator, placed between the cam- era objective and the sample, was used for capturing im- ages of the plasma plume. The attenuator was activated only during the camera frames that were coincident with the processing laser pulses. After that the attenuator was deactivated to grab unattenuated images of the hole cross- section.

[PAGE 3] Optodynamic monitoring of laser micro-drilling of glass by using a laser probe 143 The LBDP signals (Fig. 2) were analyzed for the ampli- tude [15], which was measured relative to the mean value of the LBDP signal in a 1-µs time interval (Ta in Fig. 2) follow- ing the laser pulse. The LBDP signals were acquired using a digital oscilloscope and transferred to a personal computer for signal processing and analysis. Due to the limitations of the equipment, the personal computer (PC) that controlled the experiment triggered the LBDP signal acquisition on every 20th laser pulse. In conjunction with the LBDP signal, the PC acquired the images of the plasma plume and of the hole cross-section. The image of the hole cross-section was analyzed for the major shape parameters (depth, entrance diameter,...) to allow the comparison of the hole parame- ters with the LBDP signal parameters. Fig. 2 A typical LBDP signal; deﬁnition of the SAT and the amplitude 3 Results and discussion Analysis of the sequences of images of hole cross-sections has conﬁrmed that the process can be divided into three phases. A typical example of LBDP signal amplitude evo- lution during the process is shown in Fig. 3a, where the phases of the process are marked with shades of gray. Fig- ure 3b shows the characteristic micrographic images of the plasma plume (left column of images) and of the hole cross- section (right column of images) that correspond to 5 laser pulses during a drilling sequence. It should be noted that the hole cross-section and plasma plume images cover the same sample area. They were taken at different moments of time and using different amounts of light attenuation. The plasma plume image was taken during the laser pulse col- lecting attenuated light emitted by the plasma plume, and the hole cross-section image was taken after the pulse using unattenuated light. The experiment was performed using the ﬂuence of 21 J/cm2, which enabled drilling holes through the sample with exit diameter less than 10 µm. The ﬁrst processing phase, called “incubation,” is char- acterized by 3D plasma plume expansion (Fig. 3b, image a). The initial hole has a shape close to a half-sphere with radius related to the processing beam radius. The nonuniformity of the process at this phase manifests itself in the LBDP ampli- tude variation which is greater than ±10% (Fig. 3a). During the second phase (“the deep hole ablation”), a self-focusing effect [16] appears leading to the recessing hole diameter that is more prominent at lower process- ing beam ﬂuences. Recession also depends on processing NA and focus adjustment (distance F in Fig. 1). One- dimensional expansion of the plasma plume (Fig. 3b, images b and c) leads to a strong attenuation of the processing beam Fig. 3 Phases of the micro-drilling process (processing ﬂuence 21 J/cm2) evident in (a) LBDP signal amplitude diagram and (b) characteristic micrograph images of the hole cross-section and the corresponding plasma plume

[PAGE 4] 144 R. Petkovšek et al. and consecutively to a strong (approximately exponential) decrease of the LBDP signal amplitude (Fig. 3a). By com- paring the hole cross-section and plasma plume images we see that in this phase the plasma plume originates and ex- pands in the hole. LBDP signal amplitude exhibits less vari- ation in this phase than during the previous one. The hole is crack-free. The third phase occurs when ablation tends to stop due to the predominant absorption by the side walls in a deep hole. Plasma energy and consequently its visibility decrease (Fig. 3b, image d), and consequently the LBDP signal am- plitude decreases below the noise level (Fig. 3a). At the moment of sample perforation, the plasma plume vanishes (Fig. 3b, image e). During this phase, the hole apex can ex- hibit an unpredictable form (branched hole apex). Processing laser ﬂuence is a very important parameter in laser micro-drilling of glass. In bulk glass, the process spon- taneously stops at a certain ﬁnal hole depth, which depends on laser ﬂuence—a higher ﬂuence means a higher ﬁnal hole depth. A hole through a glass wall can be made if the ﬂuence exceeds a certain minimum value. We have used our set-up to examine the inﬂuence of the ﬂuence on the process out- come with special consideration on the wall perforation and the hole exit diameter. Figure 4a presents the increase of the hole depth with the number of consecutive laser pulses at three processing beam ﬂuences. Figure 4b presents three micrograph images of the ﬁnal hole cross-sections. Using the ﬂuence of 16 J/cm2, the drilling process stops spontaneously when the hole depth reaches just above the half the sample thickness (Fig. 4b, bottom image). About 21 J/cm2 is required for repeatable drilling through holes with a minimal exit diameter. At about 30 J/cm2, one can achieve the desired exit hole diameter of 20 µm. The three processing phases can also be recognized in the diagram in Fig. 4a. The ﬁrst phase is characterized by a high initial hole growth rate which gradually decreases and approaches to a constant value, which is the character- istic of the second phase. The hole growth rate remains con- stant and independent of laser beam ﬂuence till the drilling process termination (end of phase three). 4 Conclusion We have developed an experimental system which allows the study of excimer laser micro-drilling of glass using two parallel detection systems. An LBDP probe enables detec- tion of strong acoustic waves generated during laser drilling and propagated in air surrounding the glass sample. A dig- ital imaging system allows the acquisition of micrographic images of the plasma plume and of the hole cross-section during a drilling sequence. We have examined the correla- Fig. 4 (a) Hole depth vs. laser pulse number at different processing beam ﬂuences (0.55 mm thick glass sample). (b) Corresponding mi- crograph images of the hole cross-section tion between the LBDP signal amplitude and shape of the growing micro-hole. The results show that the LBDP de- tection method can be used for real-time monitoring of dif- ferent characteristic micro-drilling phases that signiﬁcantly contribute to an improvement of the drilling process repro- ducibility.

[PAGE 5] Optodynamic monitoring of laser micro-drilling of glass by using a laser probe 145 References 1. C. Stauter, J. Fontaine, Th. Engel, Appl. Surf. Sci. 96–98, 522 (1995) 2. R. Pini, R. Salimbeni, G. Toci, M. Vannini, Opt. Quantum Elec- tron. 27, 1243 (1995) 3. S. Strgar, J. Mozina, Appl. Phys. A 74, 321 (2002) 4. L. Grad, J. Mozina, Lasers Eng. 4(4), 255 (1995) 5. R. Petkovsek, I. Panjan, A. Babnik, J. Mozina, Ultrasonics 44, e1191 (2006) 6. S. Siano, R. Pini, R. Salimbeni, M. Vannini, Opt. Lasers Eng. 25, 1 (1996) 7. D.K.Y. Low, L. Li, Opt. Laser Tech. 33, 515 (2001) 8. R. Pini, R. Salimbeni, M. Vannini, G. Toci, Appl. Phys. B 61, 505 (1995) 9. E. Matthias, M. Reichling, J. Siegel, O.W. Kading, S. Petzoldt, H. Skurk, P. Bizenberger, E. Neske, Appl. Phys. A 58, 129 (1995) 10. J.A. Sell, D.M. Heffelﬁnger, P.L.G. Ventzek, R.M. Gilgenbach, J. Appl. Phys. 69(3), 1330 (1991) 11. J. Diaci, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 63(11), 5306 (1992) 12. R. Petkovšek, A. Babnik, J. Diaci, Meas. Sci. Technol. 17(10), 2828 (2006) 13. R. Petkovšek, J. Možina, J. Appl. Phys. 102(4), 5 (4490) 14. V.N. Tokarev, J. Lopez, S. Lazare, F. Weisbuch, Appl. Phys. A 76, 385 (2003) 15. R. Courant, K.O. Friedrichs, Supersonic Flow and Shock Waves (Springer, New York, 1976) 16. C.Y. Ho, M.Y. Wen, J. Mater. Process. Technol. 145, 303 (2004)