[PAGE 1] Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optik journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijleo Original research article Percussion drilling on nickel-based alloy with thermal barrier coatings using femtosecond laser Zhaoyang Zhaia,b,c, Wenjun Wanga,b,c,⁎, Xuesong Meia,b,c, Ming Lid, Xun Lid a State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing System Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 99 Yanxiang Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710054, China b Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robots, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 28 West Xianning Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710049, China c School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 28 West Xianning Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710049, China d Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, 17 Xinxi Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710119, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Femtosecond laser Nickel-based alloy Thermal barrier coatings Percussion drilling Film cooling hole A B S T R A C T Femtosecond laser with wave length of 800 nm was used to perform percussion drilling ex- periment on nickel-based alloy with thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) in order to eliminate the damages caused by conventional drilling. Analysis of the experimental results indicated that short pulse duration and high peak power characteristics of femtosecond laser led to good pro- cessing eﬀect on nickel-based alloy with TBCs. High quality array of holes with the taper of almost zero was generated, for which the inner diameter was 162 μm and the aspect ratio was 15:1. Femtosecond laser processing had little inﬂuence on elementary components and phase structure of coating. This study provides feasible technique involving the use of femtosecond laser for machining ﬁlm cooling hole on nickel-based alloy with TBCs. 1. Introduction Aero-engine manufacturing technology is an important symbol that represents the national industrial capacity and application level. The manufacturing technology of turbine blade, one of the key parts of aero-engine, has been of widespread concern. In order to ensure the reliable working of turbine blade in the high-temperature environment, not only single crystal nickel-based alloy has been selected as turbine blade material, but also advanced gas ﬁlm cooling technology and thermal barrier coating technology have been adopted to guarantee the high reliability of blades [1]. The high performance of blade requires the use of advanced material and eﬃcient molding technique, cooling technique, and coating technique. However, processing of the hollow turbine blade with complicated aerodynamic conﬁguration and hundreds of ﬁlm cooling holes on the surface is a huge challenge for global aviation industry. Laser processing is a high performance solution for creating intricate and geometrically complex features in advanced materials. Laser micromachining has received signiﬁcant attention due to its broad range of applications. Since the emergence of laser tech- nique, it has been applied in processing microholes. With the continuous development of laser technology and laser processing technique for half a century, laser microhole processing technique has also undergone signiﬁcant development. The laser processing technique for ﬁlm cooling hole of turbine blade also experienced diﬀerent stages, and it has been continuously developed with the improvement of aero-engine design requirements. In laser drilling technique researches, micro cracks are the main defects which aﬀect the reliability of blades [2]. Girardot et al. [3] analyzed the morphology of alloy with thermal barrier coating (TBC) treated https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2019.163066 Received 19 April 2019; Accepted 5 July 2019 ⁎ Corresponding author at: State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing System Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 99 Yanxiang Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710054, China. E-mail address: wenjunwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (W. Wang). Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 194 (2019) 163066 0030-4026/ © 2019 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved. T

[PAGE 2] using millisecond laser and explained the reason for the formation of cracks among layers from standpoint of gasiﬁcation. Yilbas et al. [4] pointed out that thermal stress was generated because materials could not undergo free expansion completely due to the internal restraint provided by the temperature change. Bévillon et al. [5] conducted experiments to analyze the components of plasma in deep hole processing, and found that plasma shielding was the main reason for hole depth saturation. In order to further improve the processing quality, Krstulović et al. [6] used nanosecond laser to conduct microhole processing and found that the quality and speed of drilling under water were obviously higher than that in air. The results revealed that the mechanical impacts of water were beneﬁcial for removing particles. Fan et al. made advantage of two step method with millisecond and nanosecond laser to drill on nickel-based alloy with TBCs, and ﬁnally the result showed that the method could eﬀectively improve processing quality [7]. However, use of millisecond and nanosecond lasers during material processing produce unavoidable heat eﬀects. Therefore, it is diﬃcult to restrain generation of defects, such as melting deposition and micro cracks. Pulse width is the key factor that signiﬁcantly aﬀects the interaction mechanism between laser beam and material. For the pulse laser processing with time scale ranging from millisecond to nanosecond, melting process and heat conduction occupy the dominant position [8]. However, ultra-short pulse laser processing [9–11] belongs to “cold ablation”, with few recast layers and slight material modiﬁcations during the microhole pro- cessing. Feng et al. [12] carried out trepan drilling using femtosecond laser to process the ﬁlm cooling holes through TBCs. Wang et al. [13] investigated the helical drilling using ultra-short pulse laser to process the ﬁlm cooling holes on aero-engine turbine blades made of ceramic composites. In recent years, use of ultra-short pulse laser for microhole machining [14–17] has become a research hot topic. For trepan drilling and helical drilling [18], because of the relative movement between the laser beam and the material, the diameter of the machined hole is generally larger than the diameter of the machined hole without relative motion and the drilling eﬃciency is relatively low. Therefore, it is of great practical signiﬁcance and wide application prospect to conduct percussion drilling using femtosecond laser on nickel-based alloy with TBCs. This study adopted femtosecond laser to drill on nickel-based alloy with TBCs, and high quality array of holes on nickel-based alloy with TBCs was generated. 2. Experimental method 2.1. Fabrication of sample Inconel 718, with a thickness of 2000 μm, was used as the substrate material in experiment. The bond coating layer was NiCrAlY. The material of ceramic layer was 7 wt.%Y2O3-ZrO2 (7YSZ), and the coating was prepared by plasma spraying method. TBC was prepared using an XM-80SK plasma spraying system manufactured by Shanghai Xiuma. The structure and properties of TBCs were mainly determined based on spraying parameters. The spraying parameters used in the preparation of TBCs are listed in Table 1. Morphological characteristics of materials used in experiments are shown in Fig. 1. 2.2. Machining experiment An Nd:YLF solid state femtosecond laser device (Spitﬁre Ace-120 F, Spectra-physics Inc) was used in the experiment. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi SU8010) was used to characterize the morphology of the sample. A laser scanning confocal microscope (OLS4000, Olympus Corp) was used for the measurement of size. Micro computed tomography (CT) (YXLON Y. Cheetah) was used to analyze the internal features of the TBCs. The Raman scattering spectra of diﬀerent samples were collected using a Horiba HR800 Raman microscope. Fig. 2 shows the experimental light path, exhibiting that the light beam generated from laser passes through diaphragm, shutter, and beam splitter, successively. The beam splitter divides the light beam in two directions, one reaches power meter and another reaches the experiment material clamped at 4-axis motion stage through focus lens. The focal plane was selected at the center of the material along thickness direction. There was no relative movement between the laser beam and the material in percussion drilling of laser; therefore, the exposure per spot was controlled by the number of pulse in the experiment. The femtosecond laser processing parameters used in the experiment are listed in Table 2. Table 1 Spraying parameters of TBCs. Parameters Bond coating Top coating Primary gas (L/H) 1900 2200 Voltage (V) 55 75 Current (A) 560 650 Powder feed rate (rpm) 2 3 Primary gas, N2 (MPa) 0.84 0.84 Carrier gas, Ar (MPa) 0.75 0.75 Secondary gas, H2 (MPa) 0.44 0.44 Spray distance (mm) 100 100 Thickness (μm) 100 300 Z. Zhai, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 194 (2019) 163066 2

[PAGE 3] 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Estimation of ablation threshold The damage threshold of the TBCs was estimated by using the relationship between the ablation diameter and the pulse intensity. A series of spots on the TBCs was ablated using laser beam with power ranging from 23 to 230 mW at 2000 pulses. The ablation threshold [19] was determined through measuring the diameter of the ablated region. The square of the diameter of the ablated crater is governed by the following equation: = ⋅ − ⋅ D w E w E 2 ln ( ) 2 ln ( ) 2 0 2 P 0 2 th (1) where w0 is the waist radius of beam, EP is the pulse energy, and Eth is the pulse energy when the material begins to ablate, where Ep is expressed as follows: = E P f p (2) where F is the pulse repetition frequency and P is the average power of the laser. The ablation threshold is expressed as follows: Fig. 1. Surface morphology of TBCs. Fig. 2. Light paths in the experiment. Table 2 Processing parameters of laser. Parameters Value Wavelength (nm) 800 Pulse width (fs) 120 Repetition frequency (Hz) 1000 Power (W) 5 Laser mode TEM00 (M2 < 1.3) Focal length (mm) 200 Focal spot radius (μm) 24 Fluence (J cm−2) 276 Polarization Linear polarization Z. Zhai, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 194 (2019) 163066 3

[PAGE 4] ⎜ ⎟ = ⎛ ⎝⋅ ⎞ ⎠ W P F πw th th 0 2 (3) where Pth is the laser energy when the material begins to ablate. The least square method was used to ﬁt the experimental data with a repetition rate of 1000 Hz and ablation time of 2 s. Moreover, the square of diameter of the ablated crater (D2) is in line with the logarithm of the incident laser power Ln (P), as shown in Fig. 3. The power of ablation threshold was the interception on the x-axis obtained through extrapolating the linear ﬁt. The ablation threshold for 2000 pulses was estimated to be 1.19 J cm−2. 3.2. Dimension variation of microholes ablated using diﬀerent laser pulses Based on the surface structure of the blade, ﬁlm cooling holes [20] have a certain angle; therefore, inclined holes were machined. In order to eﬀectively realize drilling on nickel-based alloy with TBCs using femtosecond laser, the maximum output power (5 W) of femtosecond laser was selected. In this study, we adopted a series of drilling experiments with diﬀerent pulse numbers on nickel- based alloy with TBCs. Fig. 4 shows the morphology of entrance ablated using femtosecond laser, exhibiting regular proﬁle and high roundness of the entrance, without any accumulation of material at entrance. Furthermore, micro-CT was used to present processing eﬀect. Fig. 5 shows the comparison of microhole side wall morphology. Clearly, the taper of microhole is small and there is no uneven hole shape or the block caused by melting deposition. Fig. 6 shows the variation in microhole size with pulse number ranging from 20,000 to 60,000. The diameter and depth of hole increase linearly with the accumulation of pulse number. Moreover, the change in the degree of linearity of hole depth with the change of pulse number is high. The action time of femtosecond laser is far below relaxation time of material lattice; therefore, after the material absorbs photon energy, the thermal energy is transmitted only inside the lattice, and almost generates no heat inﬂuence on surrounding material. There is extremely weak melting phenomenon which inevitable results in non-uniform removal of material. Fig. 3. Plot of diameters squared versus logarithmic of peak laser. Fig. 4. Morphology of microhole ablated using laser with diﬀerent pulses: a 20,000, b 30,000, c 40,000, d 50,000, and e 60,000. Z. Zhai, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 194 (2019) 163066 4

[PAGE 5] 3.3. Through hole array processing Good linearity was observed between pulse number of femtosecond laser and material processing size; therefore, the through-hole on nickel alloy with TBCs could be machined by increase of pulse number. Moreover, pulse number of 90,000 was utilized as optimal value for through hole processing. Fig. 7 exhibits the microholes morphology of nickel-based alloy with TBCs machined by femto- second laser. The processed through-holes show high roundness without the obvious material accumulation at entrance. Besides, the taper of microhole was approximately equal to zero. There was no uneven hole shape or block caused by melting deposition, and there were no cracks between coating and substrate. Using the same parameters, large area of microhole array processing was conducted. Fig. 8 shows the side wall morphology of array holes. 3.4. Analysis of processing principle The material removal induced using a femtosecond laser is a complicated physico-chemical process [21], accompanied by the absorption of laser energy, thermal conduction, avalanche ionization, plasma expansion, spallation and phase explosion [22], and other processes. The femtosecond laser has a short pulse width; therefore, the inﬂuence of plasma shielding can be eﬀectively avoided. Moreover, the action time of the laser is much shorter than the relaxation time of the lattice; therefore, after the material absorbs photon energy, the thermal energy is transmitted only inside the lattice without exerting any thermal eﬀect on the sur- rounding material [23]. However, the accumulative eﬀect indicates that such processing also has thermal eﬀect on the surrounding materials. Fig. 9 shows the moment captured using digital camera during femtosecond laser drilling. When femtosecond laser interacts with TBCs, it generates plasma through non-linear absorption. There are laser generated plasmas on both sides of material after the formation of through-hole, and the plasma shock wave [24] generated by femtosecond laser sprays the particles outside the hole with high speed. Besides, the irradiation of laser on clastic particles leads to diﬀuse reﬂection at the back of the material. In a focusing laser system, the size of light spot changes continuously with the change in the direction of propagation of light beam. However, in the scope of Rayleigh length, the variation range of spot radius is limited, and the light beams can be approxi- mately regarded as parallel beams. When the change of ablation surface exceeds Rayleigh length, the light beam changes into spot light or divergent light, and the convergence or divergent degree is connected with Rayleigh length. Large Rayleigh length in the laser system leads to the slight change in rate of light spot. Rayleigh length of laser beam is expressed as follows: = Z πw λM R 0 2 2 (4) where λ is the wave length of laser and w0 is the beam waist radius and the expression is follows: = ω M fλ πw 0 2 s (5) Fig. 5. Morphology of microholes sidewall ablated by diﬀerent laser pulses. Fig. 6. The size of microholes ablated using lasers with diﬀerent pulses. Z. Zhai, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 194 (2019) 163066 5

[PAGE 6] where ws is the radius of initial light spot; f is the focal length of focus lens; and M2 is the quality factor which indicates the diﬀerence between actual light beam and standard Gauss beam. The above mentioned equations indicate that the larger the focal length of the focus lens, the longer the Rayleigh length of laser beam. Long Rayleigh is good for processing microhole with small taper; therefore, herein the focus lens with focal length of 200 mm was selected for drilling on nickel-based alloy with TBCs. The spatial propagation of laser beam is shown in Fig. 10. The focusing eﬀects of diﬀerent focus lenses can also be analyzed by laser induced plasma. Fig. 11 shows plasmas induced by femtosecond laser shot using digital camera with diﬀerent focal lengths in air environment. Comparative analysis of plasma morphologies indicates that with the increase in the focal length, length of plasma gradually increases; however, laser intensity is signiﬁcantly weakened. Based on the energy distribution of Gaussian laser beam, the spot area can be divided into the irradiated area, melting area, and ablation area as shown in Fig. 12. The peak energy is concentrated in the ablation area, and the high energy Fig. 7. Morphology of through hole ablated using femtosecond laser: a entrance, b side wall, c high-magniﬁcation of machined surface, d high- magniﬁcation of entrance, e high-magniﬁcation of unmachined surface, and f high-magniﬁcation of side wall. Fig. 8. Sidewall morphology of array through holes ablated using femtosecond laser. Z. Zhai, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 194 (2019) 163066 6