[PAGE 1] R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Process optimization and performance verification of CFRP laser surface modification Shaolong Li1,2 | Wenxuan Wang1 | Lin Wang1 | Zihao Li1 | Zhan Teng1 | Yikai Yang1 | Chenyang Zhang1 | Yue Hu1 | Lijun Feng1 | Disheng Wang1 | Wenfeng Yang1,2 1College of Aviation Engineering, Civil Aviation Flight University of China, Guanghan, China 2Composite Materials Intelligent maintenance and verification technology for Civil Aircraft Key Laboratory, Deyang, China Correspondence Wenfeng Yang, Aviation Engineering Institute, Civil Aviation Flight University of China, Guanghan, Sichuan 618307, China. Email: ywfcyy@163.com Funding information Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Grant/Award Number: ZJ2022-006; National Natural Science Foundation of China, Grant/Award Number: 52205239; Sichuan Science and Technology Program, Grant/Award Number: 2022NSFSC1903; Deyang City Science and Technology Program, Grant/Award Number: 2022GZ011 Abstract Adhesive bonding has gradually replaced mechanical connections as the primary method for composite material bonding, with surface quality being the key factor determining the effectiveness of composite material adhesion. Laser surface treatment, known for its green and precise characteristics, has garnered widespread attention from both academia and industry. However, the process parameters of laser surface treatment are complex, efficiency is low, and the mechanism remains unclear. This paper, based on the response surface methodology (RSM), investigates the influence of laser secondary parameters on the resin removal rate of carbon fiber reinforced polymer/plas- tic (CFRP) surfaces and the impact of defocusing on surface treatment effi- ciency. The results indicate that when the total laser energy density (Et) is 69 J/cm2, the overlap ratio in the warp direction (OLs) is 76%, and the overlap ratio in the weft direction (OLh) is 85%, the surface tensile shear strength increases by 90.59% and 27.77% compared to the original surface and polished surface, respectively. When the defocus distance is +8 mm, the efficiency of laser surface treatment is 2.25 times that of non-defocus, with minimal impact on mechanical performance. The surface treatment mechanism, with changes in Et, primarily involves the pure thermal decomposition of the resin matrix in an oxygen-free environment, oxidative decomposition, and the synergistic action of the decomposition products' oxidation. Through the coupled optimization of laser process parameters, this work enhances the efficiency and effectiveness of composite material adhesive surface treatment, promoting the engineering application of laser technology. Highlights • By establishing a response surface model, the study elucidated the impact patterns of laser secondary parameters (overlap rates in the warp and weft directions, total energy density) on the resin removal rate of CFRP surfaces. • Based on the laser surface treatment phenomena at different total energy densities, the study analyzed and revealed the mechanism of near-infrared (1064 nm) laser resin removal from CFRP surfaces. Received: 21 December 2023 Revised: 17 January 2024 Accepted: 18 February 2024 DOI: 10.1002/pc.28265 7284 © 2024 Society of Plastics Engineers. Polymer Composites. 2024;45:7284–7300. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/pc

[PAGE 2] • By increasing the spot size through defocusing, the efficiency of laser surface treatment was enhanced, and the impact on the interfacial properties of CFRP after defocused treatment was validated. K E Y W O R D S adhesion, composites, laser, surface modification 1 | INTRODUCTION Carbon fiber composite materials, characterized by their lightweight, high strength, temperature and corrosion resistance, and fatigue resistance, have gradually replaced metal materials and found widespread applications in aerospace, automotive, maritime, and other fields.1 However, existing connection technologies for compo- nent materials have not adapted well to the transition in materials. Traditional methods such as welding, riveting, screws, or bolt connections are primarily developed for metal materials. These methods often add extra compo- nent weight and can lead to stress concentration around the joints, contrary to the lightweight and high-strength requirements of components. The mismatch between this new material and traditional connection technologies results in inefficient structural performance. In terms of performance and lightweight design, bonding is one of the most promising alternatives to traditional connection methods.2 Composite material bonding can be broadly categorized into three types3: (1) Co-curing: Two uncured components are cured together in a single curing process. (2) Secondary bonding: Two cured components are bonded together using adhesives. (3) Co-bonding: One uncured component is bonded to one or more cured components using adhesives or direct bonding. Secondary bonding and co-bonding, as primary methods for component connection, exhibit adhesive performance closely tied to the interfacial properties of the adhered surfaces. Traditional surface modification methods include mechanical grinding, chemical reagent treatment, etc. Kodama4 studied the relationship between the temperature of the grinding area in contact with the grinding wheel and the grinding depth during the proces- sing and improved the heat impact by using a wet grind- ing method with added coolant. Yang5 found that the particle size of sandpaper significantly affects the surface contour, roughness, surface energy, and other surface characteristics of the samples, thereby influencing sur- face bonding strength through mechanical interlocking and adsorption effects. The best surface performance can be achieved when the grinding direction is random. Bora6 investigated the influence of different concentra- tions of silane reagent on the strength of Al/CFRP bonded joints, and further improved the bonding strength through the method of grinding. Consequently, various surface modification methods, such as electrochemical oxidation, chemical grafting, electrodeposition, in-situ addi- tive processes, microwave etching, plasma, sandblast, and laser treatment, have rapidly evolved in recent years.7,8 The aim is to enhance adhesion effects by eliminating surface contaminants,9 increasing exposed surface area,10 activat- ing surfaces,6 and modification of surface structure.11,12 Laser treatment, known for its ease of automation, environmental friendliness, and ability to achieve multiple processing modes (cleaning,13–16 patterning17–20 shaping21), has garnered extensive attention from peers. Studies such as Veltrup22 have indicated that improper selection of these parameters can result in surface debris, residual release agents, or excessive fiber exposure, all of which adversely affect adhesive performance. Given the intricate nature of laser processing parameters, the Design of Experiments (DoE) method is undoubtedly an indispensable tool. Researchers like Mandolfino23 and Loutas24 employed the Response Surface Methodology (RSM) to investigate the influence of various process parameters, including power, scanning speed, pulse frequency, hatch distance (dh), over- lap rate, scanning mode, and defocus distance, on surface treatment performance. Through model-based predictions, they optimized process parameters and achieved surface effects with high peel strength and matrix removal rates. Concerning the mechanism, Genna25 proposes that near- infrared laser energy is initially absorbed by carbon fibers, followed by heat conduction, leading to thermal decompo- sition and gasification of the resin. Xu26 asserts that due to the significantly lower latent heat of phase change and gasification temperature of the resin matrix compared to carbon fibers, the resin matrix is removed through pyroly- sis and gasification, while carbon fibers are retained due to their inability to absorb sufficient gasification energy. Zhao reached similar conclusions regarding the mechanism as the previous studies and quantitatively investigated the ablation threshold of carbon fiber reinforced plastic (CFRP) by measuring the ablation area.27 In summary, both domestic and international research have delved into the basic parameters of laser surface treatment, yet there is still a lack of exploration into the cross-effects among fun- damental process parameters and secondary parameters. LI ET AL. 7285 15480569, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://4spepublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pc.28265 by Northwestern Polytechnic, Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[PAGE 3] For engineering applications, the efficiency of laser surface treatment urgently needs improvement. Mechanistically, adjustments to process parameters may alter the interac- tion mechanism between laser and materials, and the pre- cise correlation between the two remains unclear. This study approaches from the perspective of process parameter regulation, investigating the influence patterns of three secondary laser parameters—total energy density (Et) and warp/weft overlap rates (OLh, OLs)—on the resin removal rate of CFRP surfaces. Additionally, the study analyzes and explains the removal mechanism. By establishing a response surface prediction model, optimal process parameters are identified, and surface treatment efficiency is enhanced through the incorporation of defocusing. Material surface morphology, interfacial expansion ratio (Sdr), and roughness (Sa) are characterized using a 3D confocal microscope, while surface wettability is measured using a contact angle measurement instrument. The interfacial tensile shear strength (TSS) is determined using a universal testing machine for composite materials. The interfacial properties of the original surface, polished surface, and laser-treated surface are compared to validate the effectiveness of laser treatment. 2 | EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES 2.1 | Materials and laser equipment CFRP specimens were manufactured using eight layers of prepreg cured under high pressure in a hot press. The prepreg was a combination of medium-temperature epoxy resin (2019B, Shandong Weihai Mingyue, China) and plain woven carbon fibers (T300, Toray company, Japan), with a fiber areal weight of approximately 200 g/m2 and a resin content of 40 wt%. The material layup sequence and the curing process curve during CFRP preparation are shown in Figure 1A. The prepreg and auxiliary materials were first laid up according to the material layup sequence and placed in the autoclave. Before curing, the curing pro- cess parameters, such as pressure (positive/negative pres- sure: 550 kPa) and heating/cooling rate (1C/min), were set. The material was initially heated to 100C, vacuum was applied inside the vacuum bag, positive pressure was applied to the autoclave, and it was kept warm and pres- surized for 30 min. The temperature was then raised to 125C and maintained for 90 min. Finally, the tempera- ture was lowered to below 40C for depressurization, com- pleting the curing and forming of CFRP. The surface treatment equipment employed a nanosecond infrared pulsed fiber laser cleaning system (Ytterbium pulsed fiber laser Model YLPN-100-25, 100, 100-500-R), with relevant parameters outlined in Table 1. 2.2 | Laser surface treatment and parameters Laser processing involves fundamental process parame- ters such as power (P), frequency (f), scanning speed (v), hatch distance (hd), defocus distance (z), and spot diame- ter (ω). The use of secondary parameters can effectively simplify the process. Preliminary research has identified total energy density (Et), weft overlapping (OLs), and warp overlapping (OLh) as the primary factors influenc- ing the Resin Removal Rate (RRr) of CFRP surfaces and the interfacial properties [surface roughness (Ra), inter- facial shear strength, contact angle (θ), interfacial expansion ratio, and texture aspect ratio (Str)], as illus- trated in Figure 1A. In this study, single-factor experi- ments were designed to initially determine the parameter ranges and understand the impact patterns on resin removal. Response surface methodology was then employed to optimize process parameters, and the efficiency of surface treatment was enhanced through defocusing. 2.3 | Response surface methodology The Response Surface Methodology (RSM) is a com- monly used experimental design (DoE) tool employed to effectively analyze the interaction between process parameters and relevant variables. In this study, the Box–Behnken Design (BBD) within the framework of response surface analysis was utilized, involving a three- factor, three-level experimental design. The experimental design diagram is illustrated in Figure 1B, where the cube represents the experimental space, and the spheres denote the experimental points. This design exhibits rota- tional symmetry, allowing for a stable prediction disper- sion within the experimental domain and enhancing the credibility of predictions for response variables. Taking Et (J/cm2), OLs (%), and OLh (%) as influenc- ing factors, each factor is set at three levels (1, 0, 1). The response variable is the RRr (%), with parameters detailed in Table 2. Using Design-Expert software, a regression analysis was conducted on the data, and a quadratic regression equation model was fitted using the method of least squares. The model is represented by Equation (1). y ¼ α0 þ X 3 i¼1 αixi þ X 3 i¼1 αiix2 i þ X 3 i¼1 X 3 j¼1 αijxixj ð1Þ In the equation, y represents the predicted response value, α0 is the constant term coefficient, αi signifies the 7286 LI ET AL. 15480569, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://4spepublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pc.28265 by Northwestern Polytechnic, Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[PAGE 4] linear relationship coefficients, αii represents the quadratic relationship coefficients, and αij indicates the interaction relationship coefficients between xi and xj, where xi, xj are the influencing factors. To assess the model's validity, the lack of fit, regres- sion coefficients, and the Fisher test value were evaluated through Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). Utilizing the model, a response surface was generated to analyze the influence patterns of process parameters on resin removal rate. Subsequently, the process parameters were optimized based on the analysis. 2.4 | Single-lap-joint test To validate the effects of laser surface treatment on the interfacial properties of the material, single lap joint specimens were prepared according to ASTM D3165-07 standards. The dimensions of the specimens are outlined in Figure 1C. Subsequently, single lap shear strength tests were conducted, comparing the interfacial shear strength FIGURE 1 Illustration. (A) Carbon fiber reinforced plastic production process. (B) Laser cleaning parameters. (C) Box–Behnken experimental design. (D) Single-Lap-Joint geometry (according to ASTM D3165-07 standard). TABLE 1 Laser cleaning system parameters. Power (W) Focal spot diameter (μm) BBP (mm/mrad) Wavelength (nm) 500 677 18 1064 TABLE 2 Test factor and level coding table. Independent variable Unit Symbol Coding level 1 0 1 Et J/cm2 x1 35 55 75 OLs % x2 60 70 80 OLh % x3 70 80 90 LI ET AL. 7287 15480569, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://4spepublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pc.28265 by Northwestern Polytechnic, Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[PAGE 5] of the original surface, polished surface, laser-treated sur- face, and laser-treated surface with an increased defocus distance. 2.5 | Other means of characterization The material surface morphology, surface roughness, and interfacial expansion ratio were characterized using a 3D Optical Surface Profilometer (Sensofar Metrology S neox 090) from Spain. Additionally, a Contact Angle Measur- ing Instrument (Kruss Dsa25) from Germany was employed to measure the Surface hydrophilicity of the material. 3 | RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The principle of CFRP surface cleaning is illustrated in Figure 2. Due to the resin matrix being nearly transpar- ent to the 1064 nm (near-infrared) wavelength laser, the majority of laser energy is absorbed by the carbon fibers, rapidly heating them. Simultaneously, the heat from the carbon fibers is conducted to the surrounding resin matrix, causing thermal decomposition, oxidation, or even com- bustion of the resin matrix, thereby exposing the fibers. 3.1 | Total energy density To investigate the impact of laser energy on surface treat- ment effects, the energy applied by the laser on the sam- ple surface is quantified. Et describes the average energy loaded in the sample treatment area, and the relationship between the total energy density, as derived from Equations (2) to (4),28 and the overlap rate is expressed in formula (5). Et ¼ PL v  D dh  1 LD ¼ p vdh ð2Þ v ¼ 1OLs ð Þωf ð3Þ dh ¼ 1OLh ð Þω ð4Þ Et ¼ P 1OLs ð Þ 1OLh ð Þω2f ð5Þ To control the dense arrangement of laser spots for uniform energy distribution, OLs = OLh = 90% is adopted. Substituting into formula (5), different gradients of Et are obtained, as shown in Table 3. Figure 3 illustrates the surface morphology of CFRP after treatment with different total energy densities, which can be roughly categorized into four types: a. White surface: The surface of the sample exhibits a semi-transparent white covering the black carbon fibers, as shown in Figure 3A. b. Tawny surface: Partial black carbon fibers are exposed on the sample surface, and a significant amount of Tawny matrix remains in a mesh pattern on the sur- face, mainly residing in the gaps of fiber weave, as shown in Figure 3C. There is also a slight presence of Tawny thin shell-like matrix residue in non-fiber weave gap areas, but it is separated from the fibers; c. Clean surface: The surface of the sample exposes carbon fibers completely, with an orderly fiber arrangement, retaining the intact weave pattern. The fiber surface appears shiny black, showing no resin residue on the surface, and the matrix in the gaps of the fiber weave is also thoroughly removed, as depicted in Figure 3D. d. Damaged surface: The surface of the sample exposes carbon fibers entirely, preserving the integrity of the FIGURE 2 Schematic of resin removal for carbon fiber reinforced plastic pulsed laser processing. 7288 LI ET AL. 15480569, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://4spepublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pc.28265 by Northwestern Polytechnic, Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[PAGE 6] fiber weave structure, but there is a considerable amount of fiber fractures and curling. The carbon fiber surface loses its luster and exhibits charred traces, as shown in Figure 3F,E. As shown in Table 3, a white surface is produced when the total energy density is below 34.97 J/cm2, Tawny resin residue exists at 34.97  65.27 J/cm2, a clean surface is achieved at 65.27  74.59 J/cm2, and fiber damage and fracture occur when Et > 74.59 J/cm2. The reasons for these four surface types may be related to the decomposition and oxidation of epoxy resin. In reports such as Senneca,29 it is mentioned that the oxidative pyrolysis of solids needs to consider the synergistic effects between pure thermal decomposition and heterogeneous oxidation. The oxidation and decom- position of epoxy resin matrix are divided into three stages: 1. Pure thermal decomposition of the resin matrix refers to the thermal decomposition of epoxy resin under anaerobic conditions; 2. Oxidative decomposition of the resin matrix refers to the decomposition reaction of epoxy resin in the pres- ence of oxygen; 3. Decomposition of the resin matrix and the synergistic effect of oxidation of its decomposition products refer to the cooperative action of the resin matrix's self- decomposition reaction and the oxidation reaction of its decomposition products. Due to the epoxy resin matrix being nearly transpar- ent to the 1064 nm (near-infrared) laser, the laser energy, after being absorbed by the fibers, is transmitted to the resin in the form of heat conduction. The resin decompo- sition occurs inside the resin matrix near the fibers. When Et < 34.97 J/cm2, the formation of a white surface is due to the formation of gaps between the internal resin and the fibers, creating a shell-like structure of epoxy resin covering the surface of carbon fibers. The macro- scopic appearance is a semi-transparent white color of the surface epoxy resin itself. The formation of gaps results from the pressure generated by the thermal decomposition gas produced between the resin and fibers, thermal stress caused by the difference in the ther- mal expansion coefficient between the fiber and resin, and the mechanical effects of the laser pulses. As shown in Figure 4A, during the processing, the brightness in the processing area is relatively small, there is no ignition phenomenon, and smoke is generated. In the research TABLE 3 Parameters for different total energy density gradients. Et (J/cm2) OLs (%) OLh (%) 表面类型 34.97 90 90 A 46.62 90 90 B 55.94 90 90 B 65.27 90 90 C 74.59 90 90 C 83.91 90 90 D FIGURE 3 Surface morphology at different total energy densities. LI ET AL. 7289 15480569, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://4spepublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pc.28265 by Northwestern Polytechnic, Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License