[PAGE 1] arXiv:1303.1203v3 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 1 Aug 2013 Possible surface plasmon polariton excitation under femtosecond laser irradiation of silicon Thibault J.-Y. Derrien,1, 2, a) Tatiana E. Itina,1 Rémi Torres,2 Thierry Sarnet,2 and Marc Sentis2 1)Laboratoire Hubert Curien (LabHC), UMR CNRS 5516 - Université Jean-Monnet. Bâtiment F, 18 rue du Professeur Benoit Lauras, F-42000 Saint-Etienne, France. 2)Laboratoire Lasers, Plasmas et Procédés Photoniques (LP3), UMR CNRS 7341 - Aix-Marseille Université, Parc Technologique et Scientiﬁque de Luminy, Case 917, 163 avenue de Luminy, F-13288 Marseille CEDEX 09, France. The mechanisms of ripple formation on silicon surface by femtosecond laser pulses are investigated. We demonstrate the transient evolution of the density of the excited free-carriers. As a result, the experimental conditions required for the excitation of surface plasmon polaritons are revealed. The periods of the resulting structures are then investigated as a function of laser parameters, such as the angle of incidence, laser ﬂuence, and polarization. The obtained dependencies provide a way of better control over the properties of the periodic structures induced by femtosecond laser on the surface of a semiconductor material. PACS numbers: (68.47.Fg) Semiconductor-vacuum interface (71.36.+c) Polaritons (81.16 Rf) Micro and nanoscale pattern formation I. INTRODUCTION Femtosecond lasers are known to be powerful tools for micro- and nanomachining. In particular, these lasers can induce periodic modulations ("Laser-Induced Peri- odic Surface Structures" or LIPSS) on the surfaces of metals, semiconductors and dielectric samples at rela- tively moderate laser ﬂuences1–6. Furthermore, it is possible to decrease periods of these structures below the laser wavelength, thus rising the precision of laser nanomachining beyond the diﬀraction limit7–10. Applica- tions of the ripple structures are numerous. For instance, it is possible to colorize metals and to control over laser marking11,12. For further development of these applications, it is important to better understand the mechanisms of rip- ple formation by femtosecond laser pulses. The num- ber of the observed structures is, however, very large making the control over the laser parameters very com- plicated. In general, two types of structures can be distinguished (i) resonant structures, where the result- ing period is correlated with laser wavelength, and (ii) non-resonant structures, which are not explicitly con- nected with the laser wavelength and with the coher- ent eﬀects. Thus, the so-called Low-Spatially-Frequency LIPSS (LSFL) belong to the resonant structures8. In addition, much larger parallel ripples of several microm- eters, can be considered to belong to the non-resonant structures. In this case, a large number of pulses is re- quired to provide a thick melted depth comparable to the structure amplitude, so that these ripples are rather connected with the capillary wave generation or sur- face stress5. The non-resonant structures were also ex- a)Electronic mail: thibault.derrien@gmail.com plained by the self-organized processes, described by the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation13–15. With the increase in laser pulses and ﬂuence, drop-like structures named ”beads”, and then conical structures called "black silicon" can be also obtained4,16–19. In this paper, we focus our attention at the resonant periodic structures with the period near the laser wave- length e.g. the LSFL. The classical theory of ripple for- mation proposes that scattering of the laser wave by sur- face roughness couples the laser wave with the surface modes, which interfere with the laser light, and thus lead to a periodic modulation of the absorbed energy20. This theory was recently conﬁrmed by the numerical calcula- tions based on the system of Maxwell equations for rough surface21. This scenario requires the presence of an ini- tial roughness of a certain size. Both the laser parameters and the surface roughness are, however, often unknown. In addition, several laser pulses are frequently required to form a structure. In this case, the period of the energy de- position can be smaller than laser wavelength, as was ex- plained by Bonse et al22 by using the ”Sipe-Drude” model. In this way, an explanation of the very narrow struc- tures (HSFL) appearing after numerous pulses23,24 was proposed. In addition, Tsibidis et al.25 recently investi- gated the cumulative hydrodynamic eﬀects and the corre- sponding surface modiﬁcations. It was found that a non- resonant mechanism explains the reduction of the LSFL periodicity with the increase of pulse number in Si. In addition, the possibility to create periodic surface mod- iﬁcations with a single femtosecond pulse was demon- strated for metals and semiconductor materials18,22,26. To explain the formation of the near-wavelength ripples at intense and reduced number of pulses, several authors have proposed the surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) as the mechanism responsible for the surface wave gener- ation in semiconductors and dielectrics22,27,28. The sur-

[PAGE 2] 2 face plasmon polaritons are known to be excited on metal surfaces. The ripple formation mechanism for metals has been linked with the excitation of surface plasmon po- lariton by several authors29,30. However, the excitation conditions remain rather puzzling in the case of semi- conductor or dielectric materials. Moreover, it is not clear if the SPP coupling can occur by using a single femtosecond laser pulse, since speciﬁc coupling condi- tions are required to add the missing momentum at the surface. In particular, gratings, snom probe, prism, de- fects, or roughness31,32 typically help to couple the laser wave with a surface wave mode. Thus, our study focuses on the semiconductor case, and the analyzed material is monocrystalline Si. In the case of semiconductor materials, laser-induced modiﬁcation of the dielectric function changes material properties. As a result, the importance of a transitory metallic state was underlined by Bonse et al33. In such cases, however, the presence of a nanometric defect (such as bubbles or nanoparticle) at the surface is required and those methods correspond to the well-known case of lo- calized surface plasmon (LSP) excitation around isolated defects34. It was demonstrated, furthermore, that the transient modiﬁcation of the solid properties follows the plasma dynamics of the free-carrier gas, due to their ex- citation by the intense laser35,36. However, a systematic study is still required for the conditions of SPP excita- tion on semiconductor surface by a femtosecond laser in- teraction. Under these excitation, electron-hole pairs are generated, but also thermal eﬀects play a role. That is why a clear explanation is required for the laser pa- rameter range, ambient environment and sample surface conditions. To help developing the corresponding appli- cations, the resulting ripple periods should be connected with laser parameters. In this paper, we consider the conditions required to excite surface plasmon polaritons on semiconductor’s surface. The developed model pro- vides all the parameters, which lead to the SPP exci- tation, such as angle of incidence, laser ﬂuence, pulse duration, and surface roughness for the given ambient optical properties. It is demonstrated that, under the required conditions, Si surface becomes optically active under femtosecond irradiation, and thus, SPPs can be excited by irradiation of a coupling device. The resulting periods are analyzed as a function of laser parameters. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the experimental protocol. In Section III, we present the model and consider the modiﬁcation of the optical properties of Si under femtosecond irradiation. In Section IV, conditions of the excitations of the surface plasmon polaritons are presented. In Section V, the laser parameters allowing the SPP excitation are examined as a function of laser ﬂuence and laser pulse duration. Then, the required minimal roughness thickness is discussed. Finally, the calculated periodicities are compared to the experimental values as a function of laser ﬂuence. The evolution of the ripple period is analyzed as a function of angle of incidence and laser polarization. II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS The micromachining experiments were performed by using a Ti-sapphire laser (Hurricane model, Spectra- Physics) that was operated at 800 nm, with an energy of 500 µJ, a repetition rate of 1 kHz and a laser pulse duration of 100 fs. Laser irradiation of silicon surface was carried out in a vacuum system with a pressure of 5 × 10−5 to 1 × 10−5 mbar. This low pressure consid- erably reduces the redeposition of unwanted debris from the laser ablation process. To get a more uniform laser energy distribution, only the center part of the gaussian laser beam was selected using a square mask of 2×2 mm2. A spot about 35 × 35 µm2 area was obtained projecting the mask image onto the sample surface with a lens (f’ = 50 mm). Laser beam was perpendicular to the sam- ple surface. In the present study, we consider only linear polarization. The laser energy delivered to the sample surface could be attenuated by coupling an analyzer and a polarizer and completed by a set of neutral density ﬁlters. The analyzer rotation placed in front of the po- larizer is controlled by a computer. The engraving results are in situ monitored by a CCD camera. The number of pulses is controlled by triggering a Pockels cell, thus re- ducing the repetition rate of the laser pulse to 5 Hz. We irradiated a <100> monocrystalline silicon (c-Si) wafer by one or several laser pulses at ﬂuences of 0.5 J/cm2, 0.8 J/cm2, and 1.15 J/cm2. Two series of experiments were performed. (i) At very low (one or two) number of pulses, the angle of incidence has been kept normal to the surface. (ii) At N = 10 pulses, the angle of incidence and the laser polarization have been varied. III. MODELING DETAILS Femtosecond laser can promote carriers from the va- lence band of a semiconductor to the conduction band leading to free-carrier absorption. In our model, the number density of the carriers in the conduction band is calculated by solving the following equation ∂ne ∂t −∇· (kBTeµe∇ne) = Ge −Re (1) where ne is free-carriers number density, and Ge = h σ1I ℏω + σ2I2 2ℏω + δIne i nv ne+nv is the gain of free-carriers per unit time and unit volume (m−3.s−1). nv is the quantity of valence band electrons. Both one-photon inteband cross-section (σ1) and the two-photon cross-section (σ2) are used in the model (Ta- ble I). The conduction band can be also populated due to the electron impact ionization (avalanche process). The corresponding coeﬃcient δI is also given in Table I. Re = ne τ0+ 1 Cn2e is the loss of conduction electrons by Auger recombination, where the recombination time τ0 is equal to 6 ps in our calculations37,44.

[PAGE 3] 3 Physical meaning Notation Value Unit Reference One-photon absorption coeﬃcient σ1 2ωIm p ε∞(ω)/c = 1.021 × 105 m−1 (d, g) Two-photon ionization rate σ2 0.1 × 10−9 m.W−1 (c) Impact ionization probability rate δI 3.6 × 1010e−Eg/kBTe s−1 (b, e, f) Auger recombination rate C 3.8 × 10−43 m6.s−1 (b) Recombination delay at high density τ0 6 ps (a) TABLE I: The calculation parameters for c-Si under 800 nm irradiation. References: (a) Ref.37, (b) Ref.38, (c) Ref.39, (d) Ref.40, (e) Ref.41, (f) Ref.42, (g) Ref.43. The initial density of free-carriers present in the con- duction band is 1.84 × 109 cm−3 at a temperature of 300 K. kB is the Boltzmann constant. In the near-ablation regime, using low energy photons (1.5 eV in our case), the number of excitable electrons is limited to the ones available in the valence band. Even in ablation regime at the considered laser intensities, less than one electron per atom is usually promoted to the conduction band44. Thus, the number of the excitable valence band electrons is described by n0 = ρSi = 5 × 1022 cm−3, equal to the density of the Si lattice. During the excitation, the num- ber of valence band electrons nv is therefore calculated by nv = n0 −ne. The free-carrier mobility is described by µe = e meν where ν = 1.5 × 1014 s−1 is the free-carrier collision fre- quency. Collision frequency is adjusted in agreement with melting ﬂuence and melted depth given by Bonse et al45, consistent with Monte Carlo simulations of collision fre- quency in Si46. me is the optical mass of electron-hole pairs, which is equal to36 me = 0.18me0, where me0 is the electron mass. The density of electrons is calculated by using Eq. (1) taking into account thermal diﬀusion and Auger recombination. The hole temperature and density are considered equal to the ones of free-electrons, since the contribution of the electron-hole pairs to the absorp- tion is taken into account by the optical mass in dielectric function. Laser energy absorption is calculated as follows38,44 ∂I ∂z = −αfcrI −(σ1I + σ2I2) nv ne + nv , (2) where I is the local intensity. Intensity at the sur- face is given by Iz=0(t, x) = [1 −R (x)] I0(t, x) 1 cos θ and I0(t, x) = 2F τ q ln(2) π e−1 2( x σx ) 2 e−1 2( t−t0 στ ) 2 . F de- notes the maximum ﬂuence reached during the inter- action. t0 = 0 in our calculations. Spot size w0 and pulse duration τ are respectively deﬁned at the FWHM of spatial and temporal gaussian distributions. Thus, σx = w0 2 √ 2 ln 2 and στ = τ 2 √ 2 ln 2. The free- carrier absorption is described by αfcr = 2ωn2 c where n2 = s 0.5  −ℜe (εfcr) + q ℜe (εfcr)2 + ℑm (εfcr)2  and εfcr = 1 − ω2 p ω2 1 1+i ν ω describes the dielectric response of the free-carriers. During the interaction, the surface reﬂectivity changes depending on the angle of incidence θ and on laser po- larization. In the present study, we consider only linear laser polarization. We take into account the contribution of each layer to the surface reﬂectivity. The simulated region is consid- ered as a layered structure where each layer j has its own optical properties related to the local free-carrier density. The layer thickness hj coincides with the numerical cell width. The fraction of the plain wave amplitude reﬂected by the layers from j to k is calculated by the recurrence formula rj,k = rj,j+1 + rj+1,ke2iφj+1 1 + rj,j+1rj+1,ke2iφj+1 . The ﬁnal value of the surface reﬂection coeﬃcient R is determined as R = |r0,N|2 where 0 corresponds to the sample-vacuum interface (with optical properties of the environment) and N is a layer located deep in the sub- strate. φj+1 = 2πhj+1 λ √εj+1 is the phase shift induced by the j +1 layer, hj+1 is the thickness of the layer j +1. rj,j+1 is given by Fresnel equations.50 εj is the full di- electric function given by Eq. (3) calculated at the layer j. The dielectric function is calculated as follows36,44 εSi(ω, ne, ν) = 1 + (ε∞(ω) −1) nv ne + nv − ω2 p ω2  1 + i ν ω  (3) where ε∞(ω) is the dielectric constant and depends on laser wavelength40. ωp is the plasma pulsation deﬁned here by ω2 p = nee2 meε0 . ω is the laser pulsation deﬁned by ω = 2πc λ . Photo-emission and thermo-emission are ne- glected, since Dumber ﬁeld strongly limits the transport and thus the loss of free-carriers at the surface.44,49 Several parameters of the above model depend on temperature. Under femtosecond laser irradiation, the electron-hole sub-system is excited to much higher tem- peratures and electron heat conductivity is much larger than that of lattice. To calculate temperatures of carri- ers and lattice, a two-temperature model is used. The laser-excited zone is small, so that ballistic eﬀects should be also accounted for the electron sub-system. There- fore, we use the following ballistic-diﬀusive equation51–53 to describe the electron-hole subsystem.

[PAGE 4] 4 1 4ν ∂2Te ∂t2 + ∂Te ∂t = ∇(DSBD∇Te) −γei Ce (Te −Ti) + Qe Ce , where DSBD = L2ν 6π2 √ 1 + 4π2Kn2 −1  is the ef- fective free-carrier thermal diﬀusion term, based on the ratio Kn = lMF P L of free-carrier mean-free- path lMF P = 1 ν q 3kBTe me and size of the excited zone L ∼  2ωℑm√εSi/c −1. Speciﬁc heat capacity of free-carriers is taken to be equal to the classi- cal limit Ce = 3 2kBne. The source term Qe = h (ℏω −Eg) σ1I ℏω + (2ℏω −Eg) σ2I2 2ℏω −EgδIne i n0−ne n0 + αfcrI + EgRe − 3 2kBTe ∂ne ∂t describes the energy of free-carriers by taking into account one-photon and two-photon ionization, the energy loss by electron avalanche, the free-carrier heating, the release of energy due to Auger recombination and last term comes from the variation of the speciﬁc heat capacity with time, since density is strongly modiﬁed during the pulse. The time of free-carrier coupling to the lattice was ex- perimentally determined by Sjodin et al39 as a function of free-electron density given by τγ = τγ0  1 +  ne nth 2 with nth = 6.02 × 1020 cm−3 and τγ0 = 240 fs. In our calculations, the coupling rate is given by44 γei = Ce τγ . Because of the slow thermal diﬀusion of the lattice en- ergy, we describe the temperature of the lattice TSi by a classical diﬀusion equation, taking into account the en- ergy transfered from free-carriers as follows CSi ∂TSi ∂t = ∇(κSi∇TSi) + γei (Te −TSi) The speciﬁc heat capacity of Si is a function of liquid density fraction. For solid state, de- pendence with temperature is given by relations38 Cs−Si[J.m−3] = 106  1.978 + 3.54 × 10−4.T −3.68T −2 and κs−Si[W/m/K] = 102  1585T −1.23 . For liquid state, parameters are given by54–56 Cl−Si(T ) = 1.045 × 103ρl−Si, where ρl−Si = 2520 kg/m3 and κl−Si(T ) = 102  0.502 + 29.3 × 10−5 (T −Tm)  . Melting tempera- ture Tm depends on the free-electron density as de- scribed by Eq. (4). During the phase transition, both Si heat capacity and conductivity are calculated us- ing the fraction of liquid η, and are respectively de- ﬁned by CSi(T ) = (1 −η) Cs−Si(T ) + ηCl−Si(T ) and κSi(T ) = (1 −η) κs−Si(T ) + ηκl−Si(T ). Melting is con- sidered by using melting enthalpy ∆Hm at the melting temperature Tm. The resulting thermal energy is given by U = ´ Tm T0 Cs−Si(T ′)dT ′ + ∆Hm + ´ T Tm Cl−Si(T ′)dT ′ where U is the internal energy of the lattice, T is the Si temperature, T0 = 300 K is the initial temperature of the system, and ∆Hm = 4 × 109 J/m3 is the melting enthalpy of Si. Previously, two diﬀerent types of phase transitions were shown to take place for Si57–59. The ﬁrst one is thermal melting and is described by a thermal criterion based on the required energy Em = kBTmρSi + ∆Hm. The second phase transition mechanism is a so-called ”non-thermal melting” due to the lattice decomposition due to a large number of carriers in the conduction band. The contribution of the non-thermal melting is also taken into account by the decrease of the band gap energy as a function of free-carrier density38 (limited to positive or null values) expressed by Eg(T, ne) = 1.17 −4.73 × 10−4 T 2 T +636 −1.5 × 10−10n1/3 e and by a lowering of the melting temperature described by the relation60 Tm = T 0 m −neEgap Cs−Si. (4) where T 0 m = 1687 K. Boundary conditions for transport equations are set so that free-carriers do not leave the sample. The sample is 250 µm thick, and the optical transmission has been checked to be zero trough the sample. IV. SURFACE PLASMON POLARITONS Light can be coupled from free space into the surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) only by matching the momen- tum of the SPPs. This can be done via index matching31, or grating coupling61,62. In addition, other cases can be considered. A non-resonant excitation can be performed by scattering of the laser wave on surface defects or a surface roughness. In such a case, laser wave is scattered on a broad angular distribution, and a part of the laser energy couples with surface modes. Laser wave can also interact with near-wavelength structures as described by Mie scattering, which leads to the excitation of localized surface plasmons (LSP)34,63. In each case, the excitation of surface waves requires several resonance conditions31,32,64. In this part, we present theoretical conditions allowing the excitation of the Surface Plasmon Polaritons (SPPs) at the laser- irradiated surface of Si. The excitation conditions of surface plasmon polari- tons at a ﬂat surface is that the corresponding curves cross in the dispersion diagram31,64. The dispersion re- lation is obtained from the boundary conditions of the electric and magnetic ﬁeld at the interface. The conti- nuity of the electric ﬁeld at the interface results to the expression k2 k1 = −ε2 ε1 , where ε1,2 are the dielectric con- stants on both sides of the interface, and k1,2 are the respecting momenta of the both sides of the interface. In the general case, this expression can be veriﬁed only if ℜe (ε1) ℜe (ε2) < 0 (5) which corresponds to a metal-dielectric interface. The continuity of the magnetic ﬁeld at the interface leads to the expression of the SPP wave-number β = ω c r ε1ε2 ε1 + ε2 (6)

[PAGE 5] 5 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 0.1 1 10 Light line Plasma frequency FIG. 1: Real part of the dielectric function of Si ε(ω) =   kc ω 2 as a function of photon energy compared to the plasma frequency ωp = q nee2 meε0 . If the plasma frequency is located on the left of the resonance peak, surface mode is not bounded to the surface and SPP are not allowed. If the plasma frequency is located on the right of the surface plasmon polariton resonance peak, the SPPs are allowed. and to a second SPP excitation condition given by: ℜe (ε2) < −ℜe (ε1) (7) By introducing Eq. (3) into Eq. (6) and considering an interface with vacuum (ε1 = 1), we calculate the disper- sion relation as a function of free-carrier density. Figure 1 presents the dispersion relation of Surface Plasmon Po- lariton and laser wave in the case of Si, as a function of laser frequency, normalized to plasma frequency. In this calculation, the band structure of Si has been taken into account by replacing ε∞(ω) in Eq. (3) following the mea- surements of Palik40. The wave-vector k is squared and normalized to the laser pulsation to obtain the dielec- tric function, and is presented as a function of pulsation ω. The dispersion curve of the SPP reveals a plasmon resonance of the free-carrier plasma if the plasma fre- quency is comparable with the laser frequency e.g. if the free-carrier density is high. In the case of a doped semi- conductor near the eigenfrequency, the intersection of the dispersion curves is possible31. In the case of femtosecond laser interaction, similarly, laser-induced ionization pro- vides free-carrier contribution to the dielectric function, which is equivalent to a transient doping. Therefore, the intersection also becomes possible. The bounding of the coupled wave to the surface is described by the condi- tion ω < ωp √ 2 in a perfect conductor65. In the case of damped material, however, the leaky part of the disper- sion relation between ωspp = ωp √ 2 and ωp is allowed64. The condition on pulsation in a damped material is thus described by ω < ωp. (8) The minimal density leading to satisfy this latter condi- tion is the critical density at which ℜe (ε) = 0. The coupling of far ﬁeld laser wave with the SPP is also possible in the case of a surface with defects or roughness31. In this case, the pseudo-grating period has a large thickness δk around its average value, and leads to a small but non-zero coupling eﬃciency. Because of the laser irradiation, a coupling of a few percent is suf- ﬁcient to obtain a periodic modulation of the deposited energy by interference between laser and SPP waves28. Finally, the conditions to satisfy (Eq. 5, Eq. 7, and Eq. 8) allowing the excitation of the SPP at the vacuum-Si interface can be combined into the condition: ℜe (ε) < −1 (9) This criterion corresponds to a minimal free-carrier density given by Ne = 4.61 × 1021 cm−3 in the case of a laser irradiation of Si using a wavelength of λ = 800 nm. Then, we determine laser parameters for which this condition is justiﬁed. V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Conditions for SPP excitation on Si We now demonstrate that excitation of Surface Plas- mon Polariton is possible on Si under femtosecond laser irradiation, and calculate the laser parameters leading to satisfy the surface plasmon polariton conditions. We now demonstrate that excitation of Surface Plas- mon Polariton is possible on Si under femtosecond laser irradiation, and calculate the laser parameters leading to satisfy the surface plasmon polariton conditions. Figure 2 (a) shows the maximum of the free-carrier density as a function of laser ﬂuence. At short pulse duration, the maximum free-carrier density is non-linear as a function of ﬂuence. These results are explained by the fact that free carrier absorption of Si strongly de- pends on the carrier concentration with a resonance at the so-called critical density66. The corresponding den- sity in a solid is deﬁned by the non-propagation con- dition ℜe (εSi) = 0, which gives ncr = meε0ε∞(ω2+ν2) e2 . If the collision frequency ν = 1.5 × 1014 s−1 is small compared to laser frequency at 800 nm wavelength ω = 2.35 × 1015 s−1, then, the critical density can be ex- pressed as ncr = meε0ε∞ω2 e2 .36,66,67 At low laser intensity, the maximum density increases linearly, since the absorp- tion is linear in this regime. Below critical density, one observes that the eﬃciency of the absorption increases, which is due to the signiﬁcant contribution of the multi- photonic excitation. Above the critical density, absorp- tion becomes limited by the surface reﬂectivity. Above

[PAGE 6] 6 FIG. 2: (a) Minimum of the real part of the dielectric function as a function of laser ﬂuence. Blue line indicates the threshold for SPP excitation e.g. ℜe (ε) = −1. (b) Maximum of the reached density during the interaction as a function of laser ﬂuence. Blue line indicates critical density e.g. ℜe (ε) = 0. ncr = 4.29 × 1021 cm−3. Several laser pulse durations are represented. this limit, the number of free-carriers still increases due to high temperature of the free-carriers, leading to an interplay between diﬀusive transport and impact ioniza- tion. Figure 2 (b) shows that the resonance condition is not met during the irradiation with a long pulse duration at the considered ﬂuences, since the quantity of free-carriers is limited by the low intensity. It is shown that the real di- electric function decreases linearly if laser ﬂuence is near the modiﬁcation threshold ( 0.2 J/cm2, see Refs45,68,69). We observe that the critical density is not reached in this ﬂuence regime. The diﬀerence with Ref36 is explained by the diﬀerent collision time, the two-photon cross section which is 10 times lower here (see Ref70), and the impact ionization that we took into account. In the case of 100 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 Iso-intensity FIG. 3: Fluence threshold for SPP resonance as a function of pulse duration. fs pulse duration, the condition given by Eq. (9) is sat- isﬁed above laser ﬂuence of 0.7 J/cm2. A threshold for the excitation of SPP is then identiﬁed for a laser ﬂuence of 0.7 J/cm2, a pulse duration of τ = 100 fs, and a laser wavelength of λ = 800 nm. It is also shown that under shorter laser interaction, the condition for surface plas- mon polariton excited is satisﬁed from lower ﬂuences e.g. at 0.5 J/cm2 if τ = 50 fs and λ = 800 nm. From those results, a threshold ﬂuence for SPP res- onance can be deﬁned for each pulse duration, above which the SPP resonance conditions are met. This result explains why a high ﬂuence is necessary to in- duce the formation of periodic structures in single pulse experiments4,26,68, since it results in a suﬃcient quantity of free-carriers to excite surface waves at the surface of Silicon. In Figure 3, we demonstrate the ﬂuence threshold for the SPP resonance as a function of laser pulse duration. The corresponding intensity, at which resonance occurs for 100 fs pulse, is shown by the dashed curve. By com- parison of the curves, we observe that the required inten- sity for the SPP resonance increases with the decay in the laser pulse duration. This eﬀect is due to the screening and large density gradient at the surface resulting into a strong diﬀusive transport. Next we calculate the lifetime and the depth of the optically active zone, e.g. the distance under the surface where the suﬃcient number of free carriers are excited. Figure 4 shows the real part of the dielectric function as a function of time and depth. It is shown that under 50 fs pulse duration, at a ﬂuence of 0.62 J/cm2 , the ex- cited zone is nearly 20 nm deep and the SPP excitation is allowed during a picosecond, which is greater than the pulse duration, thus leading to the excitation of SPPs in a shorter timescale than necessary for surface melt- ing. Moreover, the damping length of the SPP is given by the relation31,64 LSP P = [2ℑm (β)]−1. The value of the damping length is contained between 500 nm and 2 µm if the SPP resonance conditions are met. Then,