[PAGE 1] Sensors and Actuators A 301 (2020) 111723 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Sensors and Actuators A: Physical j ourna l h o mepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/sna Crafting interior holes on chemically strengthened thin glass based on ultrafast laser ablation and thermo-shock crack propagations C.-F. Chuang a, K.-S. Chen a,∗, T.-C. Chiu a, T.-S. Yang a, M.-C. Lin b a Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC b Laser and Additive Manufacturing Application Center, Industrial Technology Research Institute, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC a r t i c l e i n f o Article history: Received 25 July 2019 Received in revised form 28 October 2019 Accepted 6 November 2019 Available online 7 November 2019 Keywords: Glass Packaging Picosecond laser ablation Thermo-shock a b s t r a c t To prevent glass cracking from external mechanical damages, chemically strengthened glass is usually employed. The cutting of strengthened glass becomes critical due to their residual tensile stress induced in the inner core of glass attributed to the ion exchange process. This paper describes a novel technique for dealing cutting interior holes and separation of strengthened ultrathin glass for the display unit of mobile communication and computational devices. This method integrates picosecond laser ablation with quenching induced thermo-shock for accomplishing such a task. Essential analyses are performed based on fracture mechanics and ﬁnite element method to provide the scientiﬁc basis of such an approach. Experimental results indicate that with a proper temperature control, the proposed method could achieve successful separations for various enclosed shapes with the associated surface roughness satisfying the requirement. © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction With the advance in mobile computing, portable mobile devices have already become necessary parts in daily life. Ultrathin glass plays both functional and structural supporting roles for the display unit of these devices. Recently, for improving structural reliability consideration, chemically strengthened ultrathin glasses have been widely used due to their inherent high strength for resisting possi- ble scratching and damages [1]. Sodium ions are replaced by larger potassium ions at the glass surface regimes and thus compres- sive residual stresses are induced. Consequently, the hardness and resistivity to scratch are enhanced. However, such an advantage also brings challenges in fabrication and assembly of glass pads. For achieving good surface scratch resistivity in glass, a layer with high residual compressive stress is required but this also induces tensile residual stress beneath the glass surface [2]. That is, the sur- face compressive residual stress would signiﬁcantly enhance the damage resistance but the inner tensile residual stress would make the structure prone to ﬂaws. Since glass is basically a highly brittle material, any tiny ﬂaws due to cutting could trigger uncontrollable crack propagations [3,4]. ∗Corresponding author. E-mail address: kschen@mail.ncku.edu.tw (K.-S. Chen). For these strengthened glass, the existence of the tensile residual stress actually deteriorates the situation since the tensile resid- ual stress can easily trigger the crack propagation in an even less ﬂaw condition. For cutting glass to form desired external shapes, both wheel cutting [5] and laser cutting [6–9] have been inves- tigated and applied extensively. However, although the cutting problem could be solved, the existence of inner tensile stress has indeed further added challenges in the surface quality of glass cut- ting. On the other hand, for shaping small arbitrary enclosed holes, the situation is completely different. The wheel cutting is basi- cally out of consideration due to its fundamental limitation and laser processing seems to be the only feasible strategy for cut- ting strengthened glass in straight-line manner [10]. However, the requirements for creating these inner functional holes are com- pletely different. The cracks must propagate under desirable paths and cannot penetrate into the surrounding structures for maintain- ing the structural integrity of the ﬁnal panel. Both the requirements and the much smaller allowed dimensions basically rule out the possibility of using mechanical cleavage approach and the well- behaved CO2 laser cleavage [8,11] is also fail for controlling the propagation orientation. In addition, the quality of the cleaved sur- face is also critical. If the defect is too large, the fracture strength would be signiﬁcantly reduced. Previously, we have developed techniques to remove the damage layer by means of CO2 laser peel- ing [12–14]. However, this technique may not be useable in this https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2019.111723 0924-4247/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

[PAGE 2] 2 C.-F. Chuang, K.-S. Chen, T.-C. Chiu et al. / Sensors and Actuators A 301 (2020) 111723 scenario and a new technique is desperately needed for solving the above-mentioned problem. Recently, with the advances in fast laser processing tech- nologies, such as Bessel beam femtosecond lasers, laser ablation becomes a promising approach for handling strengthened glass [15–18], and sapphires [19]. Special technique such as double pulse laser ablation was also proposed to enhance the cutting efﬁciency [20] and using femtosecond Bessel beam for creating underneath stealth dice layers and then with external applied mechanical load- ing [21]. Furthermore [22], also demonstrated thin glass cutting using femtosecond laser with overlapped laser beams. Although the above techniques have demonstrated the ability and potential in glass cutting, several concern remains. First, there is a trade-off between overlap ratio and the cutting performance. For example, for a large overlap ratio, the thermal damage and the laser pulse used are the major concerns. For a smaller overlap ratio, although fewer laser pulses used and less thermal damage concern, the uncontrolled cutting ﬂaw propagation may cause failure in glass separation [22]. In this work, by integrating the knowledge of fast laser pro- cessing and fracture mechanics of glass materials, a technique is proposed to use non-overlapped laser beam drilling and control- lable crack propagation to address the above trade-off. First, one can create deep micro trench arrays over glass using fast laser. If one can trigger stable crack propagation from the surface of those trenches on such perforate structures, these grown cracks may be arrested by the next corresponding trenches before being out of control [23]. That is, by this approach, it is then possible to cre- ate controllable sub-critical crack growth from those trenches for separating the glass to form hollow structures. However, such a process involves complicate pyrolytic interaction between laser and glass materials. In addition, extra auxiliary stressing processes should also be developed for achieving a reliable glass separation [24,25]. As schematically shown in Fig. 1, by utilizing pico-second laser drilling and subsequent thermo-shock crack propagation. It is possible to successfully create inner holes with different sizes and shapes on chemically strengthened glass with different thickness and hardness. Subsequent efforts then provide mechanical forces to create stable crack propagation to fully cleaving the glass. This approach thus opens an alternative direction for future glass cutting technology. In this work, the entire process and key achievement are presented. For more technical detail, please refer to the master thesis of the ﬁrst author [24]. Based on the earlier conference pre- sentation [26], this work would concentrate on the development of the cutting and separation technique based on mechanics. 2. Approach The approach is to create perforated structures fabricated by pico-second laser drilling ﬁrst and then crack propagation is induced to form an enclosed path by any means. With careful design on the size and density of these trenches and a reliable separation method, it is believed that the crack growth can be propagated in a controllable manner. That is, the crack can be initiated at the edge of a laser drilled trench and they propagated but would be eventually arrested by the next hole. By such an approach, enclosed shapes can be cut and scribed and this technique can be applied to more com- plicate inner shape cutting. There are two key processes should be paid attention with. I.e., the laser drilling and the glass separation. In laser drilling aspect, two major concerns are identiﬁed: First, on the quality of drilling: this includes the concern of the surface damage and micro cracks induced by laser machining as well as the material properties variation due to photolytic or pyrolytic effects since they could affect the crack growth and propagation. Second, on the density of drilled trench and the maximum allowed crack propagation distance before out of control. For this issue, it is desired to have a mechanics-based qualitative analysis to guide the process optimization and it would be brieﬂy presented in Section III. Meanwhile, for dealing with the former concern, a preliminary study to address the damage of pico-second laser drilling on the surrounding glass materials has been presented elsewhere [24,25] and this issue would not be further addressed in this work. On the other hand, for the glass separation issue, two approaches could potentially be used although they actually represents two extremes in fracture mechanics. The ﬁrst approach utilizes fatigue crack growth for connecting these trenches. This approach requires a small external ﬂuctuating loading, possibly achieved by employ- ing a piezoelectric actuator, for generating cyclic stress. Meanwhile, the other approach is to use thermo-shock for generating fast fracture schematically shown in Fig. 1b. To achieve this goal, the perforated structure is heated up to a certain temperature and is then quenched immediately. The resulted thermal shock induces sufﬁcient tensile stress to cause crack propagation from the surface of those trenches [24,27]. Both of the approaches and have been investigated in this work and the results indicate that both of them can achieve successful separation. However, based on our perfor- mance evaluation shown later, the fatigue crack growth approach, as will be addressed in Section V, is ﬁnally abandon due to its unsat- isﬁed resulted surface quality. That is, severe chippings are found possibly due to fretting fatigue and this approach is creased and the thermo-shock approach is ﬁnally recommended based on the test results shown in this work. However, a successful separation based on thermal shock approach also involves complicate thermo-mechanical coupling and related mechanics should also be investigated. In this article a simple while effective ﬁnite element simulation is also performed and addressed in Section VII in conjunction with the process devel- opment and for guiding the future optimization. 3. Mechanics of separation From mechanics of materials perspective, there are two approaches to describe the glass cutting and separation problems. The ﬁrst approach is to address the problem based on a determin- istic ultimate tensile strength criterion and the failure (i.e., cutting and separation) occurs once the applied stress exceeds the ulti- mate strength. In our previous work, the laser induced damage is treated as the equivalent strength reduction and the associated stress-based designs were discussed [28]. On the other hand, the second approach deals the problem using fracture mechanics. That is, if the stress intensity factor or the strain energy release rate of glass exceeds the toughness or the critical strain energy release rate of the processed material, crack propagation occurs. I.e., K1 > K1c or G1 > G1c (1) In comparison with the ﬁrst approach, this approach takes the surface quality (i.e., initial ﬂaws) into consideration. By this approach, the separation process can be simpliﬁed as a mode-1 fracture mechanics problem. It has no exact solutions for addressing the issue on the den- sity of drilling trenches. However, phenomenologically, it can be approximated as a mode-1 fracture mechanics problem with peri- odically patterned initial ﬂaw schematically shown in Fig. 2. That is, after forming the periodic perforated structure, microscopically, the structure can be treated as a structure with periodically ﬂaw

[PAGE 3] C.-F. Chuang, K.-S. Chen, T.-C. Chiu et al. / Sensors and Actuators A 301 (2020) 111723 3 Fig. 1. Schematics of the proposed glass crack propagation control and separation method. (a) pico-second laser micro-drilling, and (b) thermo-shock separation. Fig. 2. Schematic plot of a periodic crack distribution with crack size 2c and a pitch length 2 w. system. According to [29], the stress intensity factor K1 can be found as K1 = Y∞ √ c*  2w c tan  c 2w  1 2 (2) Where Y is a shaper factor typically greater than unity containing all ﬁnite size effect and local defects and will be determined by experimental data later shown in section VII. If the K1 greater than the associated glass toughness K1C, then the ﬂaw would growth. From Eq. (2) obviously, the magnitude of K1 is related to the initial ﬂaw size (i.e., 2c) and separation (i.e., 2 w-2c). This is structurally analogous to trench size and separation. With a larger c/w (i.e., a higher density on drilled trenches), K1 would effectively increase. This tendency agrees with that observed physically. A successful separation depends on the resulted stress intensity factor. It is desired to have a stress intensity factor slightly larger than the fracture toughness of glass. If the resulted K1 less than K1C, no separation occur. On the other hand, if K1 is much larger than K1C, dynamic fracture is expected and the glass sample would be broken to piece. Based on Eq. (2), two control factors are clearly identiﬁed. First, the density of holes should be sufﬁcient high to increase the c/w ratio for increase the stress intensity factor for fracture. Second, with the density of drilled hole determined, the magnitude of the remote stress should be adjusted adequately for providing a suitable K1. Technically, the remote stress level can be adjusted by either changing the fatigue mechanical loading or by adjusting the thermal quenching rate. Table 1 Essential laser processing parameters. Laser pulse frequency 100 kHz Average laser power 50 W Laser pitch 4 – 5 m Pulse energy 140 – 200 J Cutting speed 10 −30 mm/s Taking some typical numbers as an illustration example here. With a shape factor Y equaling 2 and for a hole with radius c of 3 m and a separation w of 3.5 m. With a remote stress of 100 MPa, the stress intensity factor (by Eq. (2)) is calculated as 1.1MPa√m, which is close to the fracture toughness of typical glass (KIC ∼ 1 MPa√m). Meanwhile, by Eq. (2), it can also be seen that the result is extremely sensitive to the c/w ratio. For example, if c = 3 m and w = 4 m, the estimated stress intensity factor will reduce to 0.8 MPa√m, which is less than the fracture toughness of glass. To make (2) effective, the shape factor Y must be determined. In Section VII, by integrating experimental and numerical simulation, Y can be determined. Once Y is obtained, Eq. (2) can then be used to provide fast evaluation for optimizing the laser ablation design in the future. 4. Pico-second laser drilling Chemically strengthened Corning 2320 glass with thickness of 550 m, serves as the test specimen in this study. By using a glass surface stress meter (FSM-6000E), the surface compression stress and the thickness of the compressive layer are characterized as 717 ± 5 MPa, and 38 ± 0.1 m, respectively. By force equivalent estimation, the average tensile residual stress inside is approxi- mately 84 ± 0.5 MPa. A TruMicro picosecond laser (wavelength 1030 nm, pulse dura- tion around 10 ps) with an average Bessel beam laser power 50 W and an instantaneous maximum power of 250 W is used in this work. Specimens are placed on an X–Y table for positioning. Essen- tial laser processing parameters are listed in Table 1. The schematic setup of the laser and the optical path is shown in Fig. 3a. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 3b, since the power of the Bessel laser beam is distance-dependent and is not uniform along the optical axis, the distance between the glass sample and the laser head is adjusted to be at the pick power distance and the power uniformity through the entire glass thickness is estimated as ±1.5%, which is an acceptable level.

[PAGE 4] 4 C.-F. Chuang, K.-S. Chen, T.-C. Chiu et al. / Sensors and Actuators A 301 (2020) 111723 Fig. 3. Laser-glass distance setup. (a) the schematic plot of the laser setup and the light path, and (b) the Bessel beam power analysis and the optimal placement of the glass sample. Micro trenches are then drilled by the laser. Fig. 4 shows the top and cleavage cross-section of a typical cutting process. Trenches with a 2 m diameter and a surrounding heat affected zone (HAZ) with a thickness of approximately 0.5−1 m are clearly identiﬁed. The view from the cleavage plane also indicates that the cutting can effectively through the entire thickness with surface rough- ness approximately 1 m. Notice that there are some surface micro ﬂaws generated due to laser drilling, however, their characteristic length is small and the surface laser is actually highly compressive (for strengthened glass), these tiny ﬂaws would not propagate dur- ing drilling. However, such ﬂaws are very important for triggering stable crack growth for the subsequent separation process. The basic concept for forming a scribing line with a micro trench array and then separates the perforated structure by applying a tensile stress to cleavage has been schematically shown in Fig. 1. Demonstrations for straight and curved paths separations are then shown in Fig. 5 and both of them are separated by hand. It can be seen that the separations are successful along the scribing line and the induced crack propagations are successfully arrested by the next hole but with a few chippings, which is believed to be caused by the poor control ability of using hand separation. With the feasibility being validated, it is possible for investigating glass separation method.

[PAGE 5] C.-F. Chuang, K.-S. Chen, T.-C. Chiu et al. / Sensors and Actuators A 301 (2020) 111723 5 Fig. 4. The SEM micrograph of the cleavage surface (a) the top views and (b) the cleavage surface. Notice that the drilling quality also strongly depends on the laser parameters and the motion control and vibration of the X–Y table. During the early stage of development, undesirable results are frequently reported. For example, as shown in Fig. 6, a zigzag cutting path is resulted. On the other hand, in Fig. 6b, undesired tiny cracks not parallel to the cutting path are also generated around these trenches. These issues are eventually solved by improving the positioning and anti-vibration performance of the associated X–Y table. Meanwhile, it is also found that although the laser can effectively cut through the entire thickness, the resulted surface topologies such as chipping and HAZ could have differences on the both surfaces. This phenomenon always exists even after perform- ing parameter optimization. This imposes an imperfect factor to the subsequent glass separation process addressed in the next two sections. 5. Fatigue glass separation One natural thought for performing glass separation based on the laser drilled scribing line is to utilizing fatigue crack growth. As shown in Fig. 7a, based on fatigue mechanics such as Paris’s Law [30] by applying proper fatigue loading, it is possible to generate a stable crack propagation to reach the adjacent trench. Notice that if the initial crack orientation is not favored, this approach may immediate generate failed result. A testing system is constructed to generate tiny high frequency fatigue loading using a piezoelectric actuator is shown in Figs. 7b and 7c. This piezo actuator can generate loading amplitude around 22 m in 100 Hz. A load cell is also used to measure the forcing level. With this design, it is hope that the cracks can progres- sively propagate on the desired scribing line to form an enclosed path. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 8. Some specimens actually fail to form enclosed separation (Fig. 8a). By examining these specimen, the failure can be attributed to the quality of laser drilling. That is, tiny undesired ﬂaws can observed around those trenches as already addressed in Fig. 7a. Second, for these specimens with successful separation (Fig. 8b), severe chippings are always observed. As shown in Fig. 8c, chipping size is up to 300–400 m and this is not acceptable for subsequent glass assem- bly. It is believed that those chippings are generated by the friction, or simply the fretting fatigue during the loading process. Techni- cally, this effect can be reduced by further increase the accuracy in positioning the actuator and with a better loading control dur- ing fatigue process. However, practically, this is very difﬁcult to achieve. As a result, although the fatigue approach can poten- tially achieve successful separation of enclosed paths, the inferior surface quality eventually forces us to abandon this approach. Instead of using progressively crack growth, fast fracture based on thermo-shock is then considered and addressed in the next Sec- tion. 6. Thermo-shock separation As addressed earlier, the fatigue crack growth approach fails to achieve required performance and an alternative approach must be found. Here, fast facture based thermo-shock is investigated for fulﬁlling the task. Thermo-shock is a very common phenomenon in ceramic structure failure [27]. That is, when a hot ceramic structure subjects to a localized low temperature quenching, the severe local temperature gradient induces signiﬁcant tensile stress to cause structure fracture. Based on the argument, it is expected that the glass separation can be performed by this method, at least in the- ory. The questions remained are the required temperature and quenching conditions for providing sufﬁcient driving tensile stress. Meanwhile, to ensure crack propagation along the scribing line, the thermo-shock induced tensile stress should be perpendicular to the scribing line. This approach would generate a standard mode-1 crack. For enclosed path such as circular, an axisymmetric tem- perature distribution, which can be achieved by proper design of quencher, would satisfy this requirement. A self-designed experimental apparatus is realized for per- forming the test and for evaluating the achieved glass separation performance such as surface chippings. The system, shown in Figs. 9a and 9b, consists of a hot plate and two nozzles for proving Fig. 5. Glass cleaving results (a) straight and (b) curved external scribing lines.

[PAGE 6] 6 C.-F. Chuang, K.-S. Chen, T.-C. Chiu et al. / Sensors and Actuators A 301 (2020) 111723 Fig. 6. Defective laser drilling results (a) zig-zag scribing line and (b) micro cracks generated around the drilled trenches. Fig. 7. (a) Concept of glass separation based on fatigue crack growth and the fatigue testing system: (b) schematic plot and (c) the realized system. Fig. 8. Fatigue based glass separation results: (a) failed specimen, (b) specimen with successful separation, and (c) severe chipping observed for these successful separation specimens.