[PAGE 1] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 68 (2021) 898–909 Available online 23 June 2021 1526-6125/© 2021 The Society of Manufacturing Engineers. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Efficient milling and cutting of borosilicate glasses through a thin flowing water film with a picosecond laser Edgaras Markauskas *, Laimis Zubauskas, Paulius Geˇcys Center for Physical Sciences and Technology, Savanoriu Ave. 231, Vilnius LT-02300, Lithuania A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Thin water film Cutting Milling Picosecond laser Efficient ablation Borosilicate glass A B S T R A C T Direct laser ablation allows high-quality processing, precision, and cutting of complex shapes. Unfortunately, this technology is usually not considered as the primary candidate for cutting and milling of glasses due to low processing speeds. Thus, laser-based rear side drilling and crack generation techniques are chosen instead. However, we report on the milling and cutting of borosilicate glass plates with high average power and high pulse repetition rate picosecond laser. We optimised laser processing parameters for the efficient direct material ablation and employed water-assisted ablation to improve the ablation efficiency and the cutting speed of bo­ rosilicate glasses. The laser process was realised through a thin flowing water film, which was formed by spraying water mist on the surface of the workpiece. Firstly, we characterised thin water film parameters, such as film thickness, flow velocity, and defined a working area with constant processing conditions. Next, we optimised laser processing parameters for both processing environments: ablation through the thin water film and in air. Under optimal parameters, ablation through the thin water film was much more effective, increasing the cutting speed of 420 μm thick glass plates nearly ten times – from 0.52 to 5 mm/s. Furthermore, the morphology of the cuts was improved as well: cut wall roughness and edge chipping were reduced, spatter deposition was avoided in the vicinity of the cut. We investigated the milling of 130 to 1700 μm wide and 50 to 500 μm deep grooves with a maximum depth-to- width ratio of 3.8. Findings revealed that the ablation efficiency increase provided by the water layer did not depend on the depth or the width of the groove and remained constant. Therefore, it became possible to predict the ablation efficiency through the thin water film by knowing the ablation efficiency in air and an absolute ablation efficiency difference between two processing environments. 1. Introduction In today‘s world, the need for small-sized devices is proliferating [1–3]. As the devices shrink in size, they become lighter, more comfortable to handle, and easier to integrate into compact multifunc­ tional systems. For these reasons, many modern technologies are extensively developed and miniaturised [3]. Inevitably, technological limitations stem from the need to reduce internal components. Glass is one of the widely adopted engineering materials and one that is particularly complicated to work with. Compact lasers, telescopes, beam shapers, lab-on-chip devices, microelectromechanical systems and sen­ sors have widely adopted glass as a material for various internal com­ ponents such as mirrors, lenses, windows, membranes or micropumps. The miniaturisation of such components is complicated. One of the economical ways to produce small-sized glass components is to cut them out of larger substrates. However, cutting by conventional (mechanical) methods requires post-processing steps, such as grinding and polishing. These, in turn, adds to the complexity and the manufacturing time. Nevertheless, even after the post-processing, requirements for high quality and small-sized complex elements are frequently not met [4]. For this reason, lasers are becoming more and more attractive for high precision processing of glasses [4,5]. It is a non-contact technology, able to process almost any kind of engineering material. The main ad­ vantages are no tool wear, accurate cut control, high lateral resolution, excellent repeatability, and flexibility [6,7]. Possibility to focus laser beam into a micrometre-sized spot allows producing narrow cuts, thus minimising the damage to the workpiece. The most promising laser-based techniques for the processing of glasses are the direct laser ablation [8], the rear side drilling [9], and the crack generation in the bulk of the material [10–13]. The latter two * Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: edgaras.markauskas@ftmc.lt (E. Markauskas), laimis.zubauskas@ftmc.lt (L. Zubauskas), paulius.gecys@ftmc.lt (P. Geˇcys). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Manufacturing Processes journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/manpro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2021.06.013 Received 27 October 2020; Received in revised form 16 March 2021; Accepted 5 June 2021

[PAGE 2] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 68 (2021) 898–909 899 techniques ensure the highest cutting rates and are most suitable for cutting larger elements out of the glass. However, the cutting of complex shape millimetre-sized elements becomes a difficult task to perform. The rear side drilling technique generates large cracks reaching hundreds of micrometres in size that can become noticeable to the naked eye [9], while the crack generation technique cannot produce cuts with a small radius of curvature (1 mm or less) [14,15]. In addition, the rear side drilling and crack generation techniques cannot cut parts out of the glass material coated with laser wavelength-matching mirrors. The laser beam gets effectively reflected and cannot penetrate into the material to initiate ablation. The direct ablation technique does not have the limitations mentioned above. A sharply focused laser beam can easily exceed the typical damage threshold of conventional reflective coatings, exposing the glass substrate. The material is then ablated layer by layer, starting from the top to the bottom of the workpiece. The technique is suitable for cutting inner and outer contours and for hole drilling [15]. It allows high-quality glass processing and cutting of complex shapes. Unfortu­ nately, the technology is significantly slower compared to the other two techniques, especially for cutting of thicker glasses [16]. Modern picosecond (ps) pulse duration lasers offer high average power at high pulse repetition rates allowing fast and cost-efficient production of high-quality parts [16]. However, increasing laser pulse repetition rates makes a heat accumulation a considerable concern in a wide range of materials [17–20]. Unfortunately, in the case of glass cutting, excessive heat accumulation usually leads to the destruction of the workpiece. Therefore, laser processing parameters, such as pulse repetition rate and the average laser power, are usually limited. Sup­ pressing the heat accumulation in the material reduces cracks, chips, clogging of the channels with laser-generated debris, and the probability of fractures but at the cost of processing speed [16]. Underwater ablation of metals [21–23], semiconductors [24–26], polymers [27], and dielectrics [28] was investigated in multiple papers. Fortunately, studies have shown that the introduced water into the ablation zone can provide a number of benefits: improve extraction of ablation products (debris) from the ablation zone [22], postpone and reduce plasma formation [29,30]. Part of the laser light energy is con­ verted into the mechanical impulses as shockwaves that can act on the workpiece, further accelerating material removal rates. The shockwaves generated by the collapse of cavitation bubbles and confined plasma (confined by the layer of water) are much stronger than in air [25,26,30,31]. Furthermore, better cooling could allow the glass to withstand higher thermal loads, reduce the size of cracks, as well as the likelihood of fractures in brittle materials [16,24]. However, mixed results on underwater laser ablation efficiency were reported by different groups. In some instances, ablation efficiency increased significantly: several papers demonstrated a dramatic increase in ablated crater volume by 6 to 28 times in underwater environments. Such improvements were reported mostly in hole drilling applications [22,31]. Both papers reported a significant increase in both crater width and depth when craters were ablated in water. Contrarily, Nicolae et al. [23], reported notably wider, but shallower craters drilled underwater. In the latter case, the larger crater radius was the only contributor to increased crater volumes. Finally, Dowding et al. [27], produced square- shaped features similar to craters in air and underwater conditions. He reported a 20% reduction in bisphenol A polycarbonate ablation rate when the sample was immersed in laminar flow and 8% increase when the flow was turbulent compared to ablation in air. In the case of material cutting or groove formation, Tangwar­ odomnukun et al. [32] reported a decrease in silicon cutting depth in water-assisted conditions. On the other hand, we previously reported an 8-fold increase in the cutting speed of soda-lime-glass samples in water- assisted conditions [16]. Other works concluded an increased ablation efficiency or the formation of deeper or wider grooves in water but concentrated on the analysis of cut surface quality and heat-affected zones [33–35]. Unfortunately, most investigations did not optimise the laser process or take into account that optimum processing param­ eters could differ in underwater and ambient air environments. As a result, underwater processing had a different effect on ablation effi­ ciency across different research groups, even on similar materials. This could be related to that no comprehensive investigation was conducted under efficient ablation conditions in both environments. Experimental and theoretical work on efficient material ablation (in ambient air) emerged a while ago [36]. Multiple research groups have put much work to investigate and improve the efficiency of the laser ablation in different materials [1,37–40]. Efficient laser ablation was mostly studied in metals and semiconductors in air, leaving glasses or underwater ablation aside. Studies revealed that working at the optimal laser fluence yielded the highest ablation efficiency and best processing quality in terms of relative surface roughness (the ratio between the depth of the ablated feature and the surface roughness) [37,41]. Considering previous statements, a more comprehensive study is needed, employing both the efficient direct material ablation and water- assisted ablation to improve the cutting and milling of glasses, thus making the direct laser ablation a more competitive technology in glass cutting applications. To the best of our knowledge, no research involving high power and high pulse repetition rate lasers was con­ ducted in case of efficient ablation of glasses in underwater. Therefore, in this paper, we report on the groove ablation and cutting of thin borosilicate glass plates with high average power and high repetition rate picosecond laser. Experiments were carried out in the air and water. We addressed air-water interface instability and laser energy losses in water by employing a thin and high-velocity water film. Optimal processing parameters were found for efficient ultrashort pulse processing of borosilicate glasses in water. A thin flowing layer of water on top of the glass sample improved the cooling, allowing to Fig. 1. To the left: laser system setup used in the experiments. To the right: a thin water film was formed on top of the glass workpiece by spraying water mist with an airbrush. E. Markauskas et al.

[PAGE 3] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 68 (2021) 898–909 900 introduce full laser power into the material (42 W at the sample's sur­ face). Furthermore, the effective cutting speed of 0.42 mm thick boro­ silicate glass was almost ten times faster in water than in air. Lastly, cutting of complex glass part under optimal processing parameters was demonstrated. The findings of this work provide a deeper insight into the water-assisted processing of brittle materials. 2. Experimental setup Laser scribing setup (see Fig. 1) consisted of a laser, a beam expander, and several mirrors delivering the laser beam to a dual-axis galvanometer scanner (from ScanLab). As a light source, we used the Atlantic series picosecond laser (from Ekspla), emitting laser radiation of 1064 nm wavelength and 13 ps pulse duration. The laser pulse repetition rate (ν) was adjusted in the range of 100–1000 kHz, and the maximum laser power (P) at the sample's surface was 42 W. For focusing, we used an f-theta lens with a focal distance of 100 mm. Laser beam spot size at the focal plane was measured using Liu method [42]. The minimum diffraction-limited spot size in the air was 27 μm. Focusing through the thin water layer increased the laser beam spot size to 33 μm. In both cases, the laser output was similar to the Gaussian intensity distribution. Groove ablation and cutting experiments were carried out in commercially available 420 and 560 μm thick borosilicate glass plates (Schott D263 M). Glass samples were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with acetone before and after the laser treatment. A flowing layer of water was formed on the surface of the workpiece by spraying water mist with a commercially available airbrush (see Fig. 1). A nozzle tip was set at the inclination angle of 45 degrees, while the vertical distance from the nozzle tip to the glass surface was 10 mm. Air pressure of 3 bar was applied to an airbrush. More details on the water layer, its thickness, and flow velocities are given in Section 3.1. The morphology of laser-ablated grooves and cuts was analysed with the scanning electron microscope (SEM) JEOL JSM-6490LV and optical microscope Olympus BX51. Prior to SEM imaging, glass substrates were sputtered with a thin layer of gold with a sputter coater Q150T from Quorum. The roughness and the volume of the laser-processed cuts were determined by a stylus profiler Dektak 150 from Veeco. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Water layer This study starts with the characterisation of the water layer. An airbrush sprayed a water mist on top of the borosilicate glass plate, forming a flowing water layer (see Fig. 2). Pressurised air, which was applied to an airbrush, compressed a liquid into a thin water film and accelerated it to high speeds. High water flow velocity allowed dis­ carding air bubbles and debris from the ablation zone quickly, while the thin liquid layer reduced the amount of laser energy absorbed by water. The shape of the thin water film was elliptical (area enclosed by a blue dotted line, see Fig. 2). The ellipse was elongated along the water flow direction (11 mm in length) and surrounded by the hydraulic jump. Beyond the jump, the liquid fell into droplets or formed a continuous thick water layer. We observed a thick water layer in the opposite di­ rection to an airbrush nozzle tip and droplets in other directions. The liquid flow was laminar in the thin water film and turbulent in the thick water layer. 3.1.1. The velocity of the dye tracer in the water layer Firstly, we measured the water flow velocity. For this, we have injected the dye tracer into the water layer from underneath the glass plate through a laser-drilled hole (see Fig. 2). Injection point was located at the beginning of the thin liquid film, close to an airbrush’ nozzle. The movement of the dye was recorded with a high-speed camera (960 frames per second). Measurement results are presented in Fig. 3. The maximum velocity of 75 cm/s was recorded at the beginning of the thin liquid film. How­ ever, velocity decreased rapidly as the distance increased. At 11 mm, just before the hydraulic jump, the velocity dropped down to 20 cm/s. At the jump, the thickness of the water film increased abruptly. However, we did not record any sharp changes in dye velocity beyond the hy­ draulic jump. The velocity decreased further; however, at a much slower rate. 3.1.2. The thickness of the water layer Next, we measured the thickness of the water layer. For the experi­ ment, we used a 1 mm thick glass plate, a laser beam that was incident to a glass plate at the inclination angle of 40 degrees, and a CCD camera fixed under the glass plate (see Fig. 4). First, we directed the laser beam into a CCD camera through a glass plate and recorded the initial beam position (see Fig. 4a). We then sprayed a water mist on top of the glass plate, forming a layer of water as is shown in Fig. 4b. When the laser beam penetrated both the water and the glass plate, the beam position on the CCD camera shifted by a dis­ tance GH (see Fig. 4c). The lateral shifts GH, EF, and CD, are of equal lengths (GH = EF=CD) and proportional to the thickness of the water layer. Thus, by relying on the Snell's law, and the trigonometric relation­ ships, the thickness of the water layer (AB) was derived as AB = Fig. 2. Thin high-velocity water film was formed by spraying water mist on top of the glass workpiece. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 ) s/ m c ( ytic ole v e y D Distance (mm) thin water film Fig. 3. The velocity of the dye tracer in the water flow versus the distance from the dye injection point. Dots are connected to guide the eye. E. Markauskas et al.

[PAGE 4] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 68 (2021) 898–909 901 GH (tanα−tanβ1), where β1 = arcsin ( n0 nwsinα ) . For the calculations, we used the following refraction indices: n0 = 1 (for air), nw = 1.325 (for water) [43]. The average thickness of the thin water film was 221 ± 16 μm (in an enclosed area marked by a blue circle in Fig. 2). The thickness of the thick water layer outside the enclosed area fluctuated between 2 and 4 mm. 3.1.3. Ablation of channels in a borosilicate glass plate Thicker materials are usually cut by scanning the laser beam multiple times over the surface of the workpiece. However, when the laser beam is repeatedly scanned over the same path, the ablation rate will decrease with increasing groove's depth. In some cases, the depth could saturate, thus failing to cut through the material even if the focal plane is continuously adjusted to maintain maximum fluence at the bottom of the groove. A decrease in ablation rate (or the saturation of the groove's depth) is attributed to the loss of laser intensity at the bottom of the ablated feature [36,44,45]. Primary causes of intensity loss are the increasing reflections from the groove's sidewalls (as the bottom surface curvature increases with the number of laser scans, gradually changing the flat material surface to a V shape), and laser beam shielding with ejected debris and plasma. Therefore, the width of the groove needs to be effectively widened to cut through thicker workpieces. However, an optimum width must be found to maintain high cutting rate by balancing between the ablated material volume and the material removal rate. Also, a number of pa­ rameters, such as laser fluence, pulse repetition rate, laser scanning speed, and focal plane, must be optimised for the fastest cutting speed. Initial cutting experiment on 420 μm thick borosilicate glass plates revealed that ablation efficiency in the air was highest when the laser beam was focused at the sample's front surface, while the optimal focal plane position for cutting through the water film was 100 μm below the glass surface. Therefore, in this study, two focal plane positions were studied: 0 μm for experiments in air and − 100 μm for experiments in water-assisted conditions. In the experiments, the width of grooves and cuts was widened by off-setting the cut lines between passes (see Fig. 5). The off-set distance (jump) was fixed at 15 μm and was not changed throughout the study (jump distance was optimised during the initial experiment). Therefore, the width was controlled with the number of displaced cut lines that made up a single scan. As a result, a laser pulse overlap in Y direction was fixed, while the overlap in the X direction depended on the combination of pulse repe­ tition rate and the laser beam scanning speed. The depth of grooves was controlled by varying a number of scans. Cuts were produced by repeating the scans until the glass plate was ultimately cut. Groove milling experiments were performed in 560 μm thick borosilicate glass plates. The optimal groove width and the laser fluence was found for the most efficient milling of grooves. Optimised processing parameters then were used to cut 420 μm thick glass plates. This approach allowed us to investigate a wider range of laser fluencies without destroying the sample since a thicker glass plate could with­ stand higher thermal stresses. A thinner borosilicate glass plate used in the cutting experiments was much more sensitive to applied laser flu­ ence and the average laser power. 3.1.4. Milling of grooves at different flow velocities In the previous chapter, a significant change in water flow velocity Fig. 4. Schematic of the experimental setup for measuring the thickness of the water layer. Fig. 5. Graphical representation of the scan geometry. Each scan consisted of a fixed number of parallel cut lines shifted by an off-set (a jump). By repeating the scans, deeper channels were produced, eventually cutting through the glass workpiece. E. Markauskas et al.

[PAGE 5] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 68 (2021) 898–909 902 was demonstrated over a small distance. This, in turn, could cause inconsistent processing conditions, which could dramatically affect the cutting performance even in a relatively small area. To define an area with constant processing conditions, we milled a series of grooves at increasing distances from the front edge of the thin water film (from 2.5 up to 15 mm). Grooves were positioned perpendicular to the water flow direction. We used a single laser parameter set for all grooves. Grooves presented in Fig. 6 were left uncleaned, showing the surface contamination after the laser ablation. All grooves ablated through the layer of water were of high quality independent of the water flow ve­ locity (see Fig. 6a–e). Chipping was negligible, and groove edges were sharp. However, we noticed a small amount of spatter deposited on the glass surface at the edge of the cut at flow velocities below 35 cm/s. From that point, spatter increased gradually with the distance from the front edge of the thin water film. At 15 mm, which corresponded to a dye flow velocity of 17 cm/s, we observed a 3-fold increase in the contam­ inated surface area at the edge of the cut. In comparison, we milled a groove in the air using the same pro­ cessing parameters (400 kHz, 42 W, and 1000 mm/s scanning speed, see Fig. 6f). Large cracks were formed after just one-tenth of scans that were applied through the layer of water. Cracks spanned from both sides of the groove, reaching edges of the sample. Next, we investigated the glass ablation efficiency versus the dis­ tance from the front edge of the thin water film (Fig. 7). Ablation effi­ ciency (μm3/μJ) was obtained by dividing the volume of the ablated groove (μm3) by the laser pulse energy (μJ) and the number of laser pulses applied. Ablation efficiency was highest in the thin water film area and remained (in that area) relatively constant regardless of the water flow velocity. On the contrary, ablation efficiency in the thick water layer area decreased with increasing distance. At 17 mm, ablation efficiency was 7% lower than the average efficiency in the thin film area. We then turned the grooves parallel to the water flow and investi­ gated ablation efficiency again. Neither the ablation efficiency nor the groove quality was affected by the change in the scanning direction. Based on the obtained results, the following experiments were per­ formed only in the thin water film area, positioning grooves and cuts parallel to the water flow. 3.2. The effect of the groove width and depth on the ablation efficiency We investigated the ablation efficiency for different groove widths and depths in a 560 μm thick borosilicate glass plate. We milled 130 to 1750 μm wide and 50 to 500 μm deep grooves using a single laser parameter set in air and through the thin water film. Grooves milled through the water film were positioned parallel to the water flow. The 2.5 mm 5 mm 8 mm 10 mm 15 mm - a) b) c) d) e) f) Fig. 6. Micrographs of groove edges milled in water at different distances from the front edge of the thin water film (a-e). For comparison, a groove was milled in air (f). Processing parameters: pulse repetition rate 400 kHz, scanning speed 1000 mm/s, laser power 42 W. Grooves were positioned perpendicular to the water flow direction. Fig. 7. Ablation efficiency of the borosilicate glass at different distances from the front edge of the thin water film. Processing parameters: pulse repetition rate 400 kHz, scanning speed 1000 mm/s, laser power 42 W. 0.1 0.25 0.5 1 2 1 2 4 8 16 ). u . a ( ria /r e t a w oit a r y c n eiciff e n oit alb A Groove width (mm) Groove depth (15.6J/cm2): 500 µm 420 µm 300 µm 130 µm 50 µm Ratio = 1 Fluence 19.6J/cm2 Fig. 8. The ratio of ablation efficiency through the thin water film to ablation efficiency in air versus the groove width at different groove depths. Dots are connected to guide the eye. E. Markauskas et al.

[PAGE 6] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 68 (2021) 898–909 903 fluence and pulse repetition rate were set to 15.6 J/cm2 and 100 kHz, respectively. Laser scanning speed was set to 500 mm/s. The two deepest and narrowest grooves (500 μm deep, 130 and 230 μm wide) were ablated at a higher laser fluence of 19.6 J/cm2 since the depth of both grooves saturated at lower fluence without reaching the required depth. For the sake of brevity, in the further text, the ratio of ablation ef­ ficiency through the thin water film to ablation efficiency in the air will be referred to as the ablation efficiency ratio. To ensure measurement accuracy, each groove was ablated ten times, and then the average ablation efficiency was measured. The ablation process was very consistent for grooves deeper than 50 μm producing nearly constant ablation efficiencies in both environments with low errors: the standard deviation from the mean distributed be­ tween 0.016 and 0.065, with an average value of 0.035. The errors were slightly higher in the case of 50 μm deep grooves: the minimal, maximal, and average error values were 0.07, 0.26, and 0.14, respectively. The ablation efficiency ratio for different groove widths and depths is presented in Fig. 8. According to the results, the ablation efficiency ratio significantly depended on the groove depth-to-width ratio (DWR). Milling of wide or shallow grooves through the thin water film with a DWR of 0.8 resulted in mild efficiency improvement. Ablation efficiency increased 1.27 ± 0.05 times compared to ablation in air and remained constant for lower DWR's. However, at DWR value of 1.4, ablation through the thin water film was almost two times more efficient (1.9 ± 0.05). Moreover, as the DWR increased further, the ablation efficiency ratio began to rise rapidly, reaching the maximum value of 19 for a 500 μm deep and 130 μm wide groove (depth-to-width ratio of 3.8). Results imply that even higher ablation efficiency ratios could be reached for even deeper and narrower grooves. Next, the ablation efficiency versus groove width is presented in Fig. 9 for three different groove depths (130, 300, and 420 μm). The red and the blue curves represent ablation in air and through the thin water film, respectively. The shape of both efficiency curves in air and through thin water film look alike and are almost indistinguishable from each other. This can be seen by inspecting the grey curve, which is identical to the red one, only is shifted up in Y direction so that both curves are at the same height. Here, a shift in Y-axis corresponds to an absolute change in ablation efficiency between both environments (ablation in air and through the thin water film). An absolute change (shift) in ablation efficiency of 0.21 ± 0.014 was observed for all inspected groove depths in the 50 to 500 μm range. The shift neither depended on the width nor the depth of the groove, meaning that a loss of ablation efficiency caused by the decrease in groove width was equal in both environments. This way, we could predict ablation efficiency in water by knowing the absolute change in ablation efficiency between the two environ­ ments and ablation efficiency in the air (or vice versa): ηwater = ∆eff. + ηair ηair (1) where ηwater is ablation efficiency through the thin water film, ηair is ablation efficiency in air, and ∆eff. is an absolute change in ablation ef­ ficiency between the two environments. Additionally, a fixed shift in absolute efficiency between the two environments can give more understanding of high ablation efficiency ratios for narrow and deep grooves. Fig. 9 shows that both efficiency curves suffer from a loss of efficiency as the width of the groove is reduced. Also, absolute efficiency losses are equal in both environments, meaning that the ablation efficiency gain provided by the water film is constant. Thus, at some point, the efficiency gain surpasses ablation efficiency in air, yielding high efficiency ratios. Lastly, we believe that shockwaves generated in water (collapse of cavitation bubbles and confined plasma expansion) are the main con­ tributors to increased ablation efficiency in water [22,25,46]. Generated shockwaves act on the bottom surface and the sidewalls of the ablated feature, accelerating material removal from the deep groove. This also contributes to less beam shielding by the ablation products. The shockwaves that impinge on the sidewalls of the groove produce lesser taper angles of the ablated feature, allowing to maintain flatter groove's bottom at deeper depths than in air sustaining the ablation efficiency higher [46]. In our case, taper angles were 1.8 ± 0.2, 1.6 ± 0.2, and 1.4 ± 0.19 times smaller than in air for 420, 300, and 130 μm deep grooves, respectively. Steeper walls contributed to ablation efficiency also by increasing the volume of the removed material. This was most notable at higher DWR's: at DWR = 1.4–3.2, the volume of the grooves ablated in water was 27 ± 1.8% higher than in air. At DWR = 1, the volume of grooves ablated in water was higher by 17.7 ± 2.8%, while at low DWR's (0.25 and less), the difference in ablated volume was only 4 ± 2%. The dif­ ference in ablated volume decreased with the DWR parameter since most of the bottom surface of the groove remained flat. This mitigated the relative increase in removed material volume by the steeper walls compared to a total volume of the groove: However, the efficiency shift remained unchanged. We believe that at low DWR's the decreasing difference in ablated volume is compen­ sated by the increased material removal by shockwaves impinging the bottom surface of the groove, maintaining the ablation efficiency gain in 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Groove depth: 130µm Groove width (mm) ). u . a ( y c n eiciff e n oit alb A In water In air In air +0.2 +0.2 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 Groove depth: 300µm Groove width (mm) In water In air In air +0.22 +0.22 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 Groove depth: 420µm Groove width (mm) In water In air In air +0.23 +0.23 a) b) c) Fig. 9. Glass ablation efficiency versus groove width at 130 (a), 300 (b), and 420 μm (c) groove depths. Grey curve represents a shifted efficiency curve in the air by a constant that is equal to an average efficiency difference between air and water at a particular groove depth. Y axes are normalized by ablation efficiency values divided by the peak value. E. Markauskas et al.