[PAGE 1] Classical top-down fused silica milling with a femtosecond laser using different laser pulse burst regimes Laimis Zubauskas *, Edgaras Markauskas , Patricija ˇSleini¯ut˙e , Paulius Geˇcys Center for Physical Sciences and Technology, Savanoriu Ave. 231, Vilnius, LT-2300, Lithuania H I G H L I G H T S G R A P H I C A L A B S T R A C T • GHz burst regimes initiated the change in glass removal mechanism. • GHz burst regimes enabled filamentation-induced volumetric dam­ age of glass. • Burst regimes achieved a high 312 mm3/min milling rate of fused silica glass. A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Laser processing Glass milling Laser beam filamentation BiBurst GHz burst Material removal mechanism A B S T R A C T Classical top-down ablation with ultrafast lasers is a promising technique for high-speed glass processing, especially when operating in GHz burst or BiBurst (GHz in MHz bursts) regimes. In this paper, we systematically studied fused silica milling with 176.2 fs duration laser pulses under three different processing regimes: non- burst, GHz burst, and BiBurst. We evaluated laser-milled cavities by measuring their surface roughness Sa, volume, edge chipping, and sidewall taper. The optimised BiBurst regime showed the highest performance, increasing glass milling efficiency and material removal rate by up to 40 times compared to the non-burst regime. This allowed achieving fused silica milling efficiency of 9.2 mm3/min/W and a material removal rate of 312 mm3/min. The increase in performance was attributed to the transition of the material removal mechanism from gentle ablation to coarser glass fracturing, assisted by laser beam filamentation inside the glass. 1. Introduction Ultrashort pulsed lasers are increasingly used for processing transparent materials such as glass. They offer extremely high precision, reaching submicron range [1,2], efficient material usage, and the ability to process almost any type of material [3]. Femtosecond lasers are * Corresponding author. E-mail address: laimis.zubauskas@ftmc.lt (L. Zubauskas). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Manufacturing Processes journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/manpro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2025.10.054 Received 2 May 2025; Received in revised form 10 September 2025; Accepted 15 October 2025 Journal of Manufacturing Processes 155 (2025) 820–830 Available online 23 October 2025 1526-6125/© 2025 The Society of Manufacturing Engineers. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

[PAGE 2] particularly favourable because of their pulse duration being shorter than the material thermalisation time. This limits thermal effects inside the processed material [4,5] and enables high-quality processing through stronger non-linear energy absorption [6,7]. Despite these ad­ vantages, the main drawbacks are the high costs and relatively low productivity, particularly in material processing rates and efficiency, compared to lasers with longer pulse durations. The most promising laser-based techniques for glass milling are classical top-down ablation [8] and bottom-up milling [9,10]. In the bottom-up technique, the milling begins at the bottom surface of the glass element and progresses towards the top surface, producing taper- less structures [11]. This technique achieves significantly higher mill­ ing rates and efficiencies than top-down ablation, reaching 140.4 mm3/ min and 7.8 mm3/min/W, respectively [12]. However, the bottom-up technique suffers from more significant edge chipping, with the dam­ age extending up to several hundred micrometres [9]. Furthermore, this technique is not suitable for opaque materials, where the laser beam cannot penetrate to the opposite surface of the material to initiate the milling. It is also incompatible with the fabrication of 3D structures, as once one side of the element has been processed, the laser beam can no longer pass through the modified material unscattered to reach and ablate the opposite surface. On the other hand, classical top-down ablation is based on material removal from the top surface of the workpiece to the bottom, allowing 3D structuring of transparent and opaque materials. However, it suffers from low milling rates and efficiency and cannot produce taper-less structures [13]. Various techniques can be used to minimise tapers, such as static beam inclination [14] or laser trepanning technology [15]. Unfortunately, such techniques add complexity and increase system costs. In addition, trepanning heads are typically combined with posi­ tioning tables to realise beam scanning over the workpiece. As a result, overall processing rates decline even further, limiting the industrial applicability of such solution. Fortunately, recent developments in ultrashort pulsed laser tech­ nology opened new possibilities for increasing milling rates. Modern laser sources can emit bursts with sub-pulse separation in the nano­ second (MHz sub-pulse repetition rate) or picosecond (GHz sub-pulse repetition rate) range. Remund et al. [16] compared the milling effi­ ciencies of different materials using non-burst, and GHz burst regimes with 230 fs duration pulses. They studied the milling of steel, brass, copper, silicon, zirconium oxide, sapphire, and soda-lime glass. While metals and semiconductors showed reduced milling efficiency under GHz bursts, the efficiency for milling sapphire and soda-lime glass increased significantly. The highest milling efficiency for soda-lime glass was reported at 32.7 μm3/μJ (1.96 mm3/min/W) using GHz bursts comprised of 25 sub-pulses, nearly 3 times higher than the non-burst regime (10.1 μm3/μJ and 0.61 mm3/min/W). The authors attributed process improvement to enhanced non-linear absorption, although the exact mechanisms behind GHz burst processing of glasses remained unclear. Caballero-Lucas et al. [17] discussed increases in silicon ablation efficiency in the GHz burst regime, which they also attributed to enhanced energy absorption. Explanation of the increase in efficiency was based on the study by Schultze et al. [18] on bandgap dynamics in silicon, which demonstrated that the probability of ionisation through direct and indirect bandgap depended on laser intensity. However, it is not straightforward to assume that the same processes occur in brittle dielectrics with much wider bandgaps. Moreover, different materials show distinct responses to GHz burst regimes: the surface quality of copper or silicon remained unchanged or even improved [19,20] whereas glass underwent more destructive removal accompanied by degraded surface quality [16,21]. Nevertheless, other research groups reported similar milling effi­ ciency increases when bursts were applied to ablate glasses. Metzner et al. [22] compared fused silica top-down ablation using non-burst and GHz burst regimes with 190 fs laser pulses. They demonstrated a fivefold increase in milling efficiency compared to the non-burst regime, increasing milling efficiency from 5.4 μm3/μJ (0.32 mm3/min/W) to 26.8 μm3/μJ (1.61 mm3/min/W) for 5 sub-pulses in GHz burst. Process efficiency increased significantly when sub-pulse fluence dropped below the ablation threshold value of the non-burst regime. Moreover, the surface quality did not degrade, as the surface roughness remained similar across all investigated regimes. Schwarz et al. [21] also studied fused silica milling using femto­ second pulses in both non-burst and GHz burst regimes. They reported increased ablation efficiency from 0.41 mm3/min/W in the non-burst regime to 3.05 mm3/min/W for burst processing with 10 sub-pulses within the burst. Unlike in Metzner's study, the surface quality deteri­ orated with longer GHz bursts. The surface roughness Ra increased from 0.4 μm in the non-burst regime to 3 μm for GHz bursts comprised of 10 sub-pulses. Results revealed two ablation behaviours – gentle ablation in the non-burst regime and coarser glass fragmentation at higher sub- pulse numbers. Recent studies showed that glass milling efficiency and material removal rates improve with an increasing number of sub-pulses in a burst. Therefore, an effective way of increasing the number of sub-pulses even further is the BiBurst regime, which combines GHz and MHz bursts. However, this regime is relatively new and remains scarcely explored, particularly for processing dielectric materials such as glass. In this study, we systematically investigated fused silica milling using a femtosecond laser operating in non-burst, GHz burst, and BiBurst regimes. Milling efficiencies were calculated and compared while ac­ counting for tapers formed in ablated structures (cavities). Furthermore, surface quality was evaluated by measuring surface roughness Sa and the maximum edge chipping for different numbers of sub-pulses within the burst. Both GHz burst and BiBurst regimes significantly improved mill­ ing rates and efficiencies. These improvements were primarily attrib­ uted to a shift in the material removal mechanism from gentle glass ablation to glass cracking, which was additionally enhanced by laser- induced filamentation inside the glass, modifying the material at greater depths. 2. Experimental setup Ablation experiments were conducted on 150 × 150 mm2 size and 6.3 mm thick fused silica glass plates. A femtosecond laser source Car­ bide 40 from Light Conversion was used, with a central wavelength of 1030 nm and a pulse duration of 176.2 fs. The laser was set to a fixed pulse repetition rate of 100 kHz to achieve the maximum pulse energy of 338 μJ, resulting in an average laser power of 33.8 W. The laser beam had a similar-to-Gaussian energy distribution with a beam quality factor of M2 < 1.2. The average power was controlled using an internal attenuator and measured at the sample surface with an Ophir F150(200) A-CM-16 power measurement sensor. Fig. 1 presents a schematic of the laser system setup used for glass milling experiments. The initial laser beam diameter at the laser output was increased 1.5 times using a beam expander BE. The linearly polar­ ised laser beam was then converted to a circular polarisation using the quarter-wave plate (λ/4). Finally, mirrors V1 and V2 directed the beam to the galvanometer scanner IntelliSCANse 14 (Scanlab). Cavities were milled by scanning the laser beam in parallel lines separated by a hatch distance of 5 μm, as shown in Fig. 1. During the laser process optimisation phase, 2 × 2 mm2 cavities were ablated with 5 scans. Ultimately, the best performing regime was additionally refined by adjusting the pulse repetition rate, hatch distance, and scanning speed. An f-theta lens with a focal length of 100 mm (Still Optics) focused the laser beam to a diffraction-limited spot size of 2ω0 = 19 μm, where ω0 is the beam radius at 1/e2 intensity level. The spot size was deter­ mined using the D-squared method proposed by Liu [23]. During the laser process optimisation phase, the focus was fixed at the initial sur­ face of the glass plate and remained unchanged throughout the milling. L. Zubauskas et al. Journal of Manufacturing Processes 155 (2025) 820–830 821

[PAGE 3] The focal plane was adjusted after each scan only for the fabrication of the final structure using the best performing laser parameter set. The maximum laser fluence F was related to laser pulse energy Ep and was calculated to be 238.5 J/cm2 based on the following formula: F = 2Ep π(w0)2. (1) The laser operated in 3 different pulsed regimes, as illustrated in Fig. 2. In the non-burst regime, individual pulses were emitted at a fixed repetition rate of 100 kHz (10 μs intervals between pulses). In the GHz burst regime, each pulse was divided into bursts, where each burst contained a number of sub-pulses (P) separated by 470 ps (intra-burst repetition rate of 2.13 GHz). The number of sub-pulses within the burst was adjustable from 2 to 40 while maintaining the 10 μs interval be­ tween the bursts. In the BiBurst regime, a number of MHz bursts (N) were emitted at a 63.3 MHz repetition rate, each containing a number of sub-pulses (P) emitted at a 2.13 GHz repetition rate. Nevertheless, the 10 μs interval between BiBursts was maintained. The energy of sub- pulses within the bursts slightly deviated (up to 7.3 %), while the in­ tensity of the last sub-pulse in each burst was up to 3 times higher than the others (see Fig. 2). Balage et al. [24] investigated femtosecond GHz-burst drilling of soda-lime glass with different intra-burst energy distributions. They reported that a decreasing envelope (higher pulse energy at the burst front) enhanced the initial drilling rate but led to faster saturation of depth and the formation of cracks. In contrast, a flat envelope achieved the deepest and highest-quality holes, characterised by smooth, crack- free sidewalls, albeit at a lower drilling rate. An increasing envelope provided intermediate results, offering a compromise between ablation efficiency and quality. The authors noted that these differences became significant only once hole depths exceeded approximately 600 μm, whereas for shallow holes (<200 μm) no clear effect of burst shape was observed. Since the present study focuses on surface milling, the pro­ cessing conditions are more closely related to the shallow drilling regime, where envelope-shape effects are less pronounced. Therefore, we believe that the effect of the more intense last pulse in our study is negligible. Even so, all three laser regimes (non-burst, GHz burst, and BiBurst) were investigated for fused silica milling. The laser fluence was gradu­ ally decreased from the maximum value until the material removal became unstable and eventually stopped. In GHz burst and BiBurst re­ gimes, the total number of sub-pulses S was varied from 2 and 4 to the maximal number of 40 and 600, respectively. All other processing pa­ rameters were fixed: pulse repetition rate was 100 kHz, scanning speed was 3 m/s (resulting in a 30 μm pitch), hatch was 5 μm, and number of scans was 5. A scanning pitch of 30 μm and hatch distance of 5 μm was chosen as a compromise to ensure sufficient overlap of the laser-affected zones under non-burst and burst-mode conditions. Since the laser modification diameter increases significantly with the number of pulses per burst (>100 μm in our case), this pitch guaranteed continuous Fig. 1. Schematic illustration showing optical path of the laser beam and the scanning strategy used for glass milling. Cavities with an area size of 2 × 2 mm2 were ablated. BE indicates the laser beam expander, while V1 and V2 represent mirrors used for directing the laser beam to the scanner. Fig. 2. Schematic illustration showing the time scale of 3 different laser regimes: non-burst, GHz burst, and BiBurst (P of GHz bursts in the N of MHz bursts). The figure presents these cases: (i) two individual pulses in the non-burst regime, (ii) two bursts in the GHz regime, each containing three sub-pulses (P = 3 and N = 1), and (iii) two BiBursts, each composed of two MHz bursts (N = 2), with every MHz burst containing three GHz sub-pulses (P = 3) or P3N2 regime. L. Zubauskas et al. Journal of Manufacturing Processes 155 (2025) 820–830 822

[PAGE 4] modification during milling rather than leaving unprocessed gaps. Ablated cavities were characterised using an optical profiler S neox (Sensofar). The cavity depth d, ablated surface roughness Sa and side­ wall taper angle α were assessed. Finally, edge surface chipping was evaluated by examining laser milled cavities with an optical microscope Eclipse LV100NDA (Nikon). The measured cavity depth was averaged over the entire bottom surface of the ablated area and subsequently employed to evaluate ablation performance. Thus, a simplified milling efficiency γ based on idealised volume estimate can be obtained using the following equation: γ = V t • Pavg = a • b • d t • Pavg , (2) where V is the idealised ablation volume, which excludes the remaining volume of non-ablated material beneath the tapered sidewalls (cavity sidewalls are assumed to be vertical, see Fig. 3). Parameters a and b correspond to the cavity side lengths (in our case, a = b = 2 mm) and Pavg denotes used average laser power. Finally, the parameter t represents the milling time, excluding laser beam acceleration and deceleration, and is defined as t = a • b • K h • s . (3) Here, K is number of ablated layers or number of scans (K = 5), h is hatch (h = 5), and s is the scanning speed. However, the influence of tapered sidewalls becomes substantial when ablating cavities deeper than a few hundred micrometres and, therefore, must be taken into account. The accuracy of the milling ef­ ficiency estimation was improved by incorporating the taper angle α into Eq. (2). This provided a more accurate estimate of milling efficiency γR, since the actual ablated volume was lower due to tapered sidewalls: γR = V −Vtaper t • Pavg = V −d2 • a • tanα −d2 • b • tanα + 2 • d3 • tan2α t • Pavg . (4) Here, Vtaper denotes the volume of material remaining beneath the tapered sidewalls of the cavity (see Fig. 3). Additionally, milling rates MR were also evaluated: MR = γR • Pavg. (5) The overall maximal milling efficiencies for each regime (non-burst, GHz burst and BiBurst) were reported with standard deviations to enable clearer comparison, as burst regimes led to more destructive glass removal, resulting in greater ablated depth deviations and higher sur­ face roughness Sa. 3. Results and discussion The analysis of the results is structured into four main parts. First, milling efficiencies achieved with non-burst and GHz burst regimes are compared. Next, a BiBurst regime was employed to further increase the milling efficiency. Then, a direct comparison of glass milling regimes was conducted under the same ablation conditions by analysing surface roughness Sa and maximum edge chipping. Finally, the most efficient regime was identified and further optimised to maximise milling effi­ ciency and fabricate complex 3D structure. 3.1. Fused silica ablation using a GHz burst regime The investigation began with the milling experiments of fused silica glass using non-burst and GHz burst regimes. The milling efficiency results are presented in Fig. 4a. In the GHz burst regime, efficiency peaks were observed for bursts containing up to 5 sub-pulses. Beyond this point, increasing the number of sub-pulses led to a gradual increase in milling efficiency, with the highest efficiency values obtained at the lowest fluence levels. This inverse relationship between laser fluence and milling efficiency aligned well with findings reported by other groups [16,22]. Overall, the GHz burst regime substantially improved milling efficiency, achieving up to 12.7 times higher efficiency than the non-burst regime, with a maximum value of 2.94 ± 0.77 mm3/min/W (see Fig. 4a). The relationship between the maximum milling efficiency and the number of sub-pulses in GHz bursts is presented in Fig. 4b. A transition from the non-burst to GHz burst regime with two sub-pulses led to a 12.5 % decrease in milling efficiency. This reduction in efficiency was attributed to material plume shielding generated by the first sub-pulse in each burst. The plume then hindered the energy delivery to the material for the next sub-pulse, leading to decreased process efficiency [25]. Similarly, as in copper ablation [26], the third sub-pulse in the burst fully recovered the lost efficiency. The efficiency increased by approxi­ mately 24.4 % when transitioning from 2 to 3 sub-pulse bursts, out­ performing the non-burst regime by 13.6 %. Further increase in the number of sub-pulses led to a continuous rise in milling efficiency. Milling efficiency continued increasing up to 15 sub-pulses, after which it started fluctuating at around 2.58 ± 0.39 mm3/min/W (indicating saturation), as shown in Fig. 4b. The underlying mechanism for a rapid efficiency increase can be seen in crater ablation experiments depicted in Fig. 4c. Here, the craters were ablated at 52.7 J/cm2 laser fluence, close to the conditions under which maximum milling efficiencies were achieved. At 5 sub-pulses per burst, the material removal mechanism transitioned from ablation to glass fracture-assisted material removal, evidenced by excessive chipping and cracking at crater edges. Intensified glass cracking and chipping corre­ lated well with increase in removed material volume shown in Fig. 4d. The ablated crater volume began to increase rapidly after 5 sub-pulses, and with 40 sub-pulse bursts it was about eight times larger than in the non-burst regime. This finding is in good agreement with surface milling experiment, where rapid efficiency increase was also observed starting from 5th sub-pulse. This suggests that burst-mode processing funda­ mentally changes the material removal mechanism: instead of expend­ ing energy on gradual evaporation, the process is dominated by stress- assisted cracking and particle ejection, which channels a larger frac­ tion of the deposited energy into material removal. This shift underpins the high laser milling throughput observed in burst regimes. In classical ablation, Coulomb explosion is considered one of the mechanisms responsible for non-metallic material removal. However, during burst-mode irradiation in our case, the maximum efficiencies (see Fig. 4a) were achieved at intensities lower than 4 × 1013 W/cm2 (P = 5 sub-pulses in the GHz burst), which are below the reported thresholds for Coulomb explosion [27–30]. Therefore, Coulomb explo­ sion appears unlikely to contribute significantly under our processing conditions. Instead, the transition in material removal mechanism dur­ ing burst processing was attributed to several factors. Firstly, as the number of sub-pulses increased, the total energy deposition time extended from femtoseconds (non-burst regime) to nanoseconds (GHz burst regime), significantly increasing stress accumulation within the glass. Also, a high pulse repetition rate of approximately 2 GHz between individual sub-pulses further intensified heat accumulation inside the material [31]. Finally, energy delivery to the material became more efficient as the total burst energy was distributed across more sub- pulses. This led to a reduction in the energy of individual sub-pulses, reducing plasma formation and laser beam shielding caused by the generated plasma [32,33]. Consequently, the amount of incident laser Fig. 3. Schematic showing a cross-section of a milled cavity. L. Zubauskas et al. Journal of Manufacturing Processes 155 (2025) 820–830 823

[PAGE 5] energy reaching the target material increased increasing the generated stresses inside the glass. A similar increase in ablation efficiency for femtosecond lasers operating in GHz burst mode was reported in several other studies [16,21]. In those studies, efficiency gain was also primarily attributed to a transition in material removal mechanism towards a more destructive glass ablation involving glass cracking and fragmentation. Next, surface and volumetric damage in glass was investigated after ablating craters with GHz bursts with 10 sub-pulses per burst (see Fig. 5). In GHz regime at fluence levels above 42 J/cm2, the glass surface was damaged by formed craters (see Fig. 5a). However, at lower fluence levels, only volumetric subsurface damage occurred beneath the glass surface, characterised by randomly directed cracking (Fig. 5b). In contrast, the non-burst regime formed relatively smooth, gently ablated surface even at the laser fluence of 10 J/cm2 (see Fig. 5c). Side view micrographs revealed that the volumetric damage was caused by laser beam filamentation (see Fig. 5d). Even at the lowest fluence of 10 J/cm2, each sub-pulse had a peak power of 8.2 MW, which was approximately double the threshold for self-focusing in glass (4.16 MW). Similar filament-induced glass volume damage has been reported in [34,35]. Furthermore, an increase in fluence shifted filament's uppermost point closer to the front surface of the glass sample (see Fig. 5b and d). When the fluence increased from 10 to 31 J/cm2, the distance from the glass surface to the uppermost point of the filamentation-induced damage decreased from 270 to 70 μm. A similar shift in filamentation- induced damage position was observed and studied by several groups Fig. 4. Milling efficiency as a function of applied fluence at different number of sub-pulses in GHz burst (a); Maximum milling efficiency as a function of the applied number of sub-pulses in the GHz burst (b); Optical images of craters formed on the glass surface using non-burst and GHz burst regimes (c); Crater volume as a function of the number of sub-pulses in the GHz burst (d). All craters were formed using a fluence of 52.7 J/cm2. Every crater was irradiated with 100 bursts at a 100 kHz repetition rate. Lines are provided as a visual guide. L. Zubauskas et al. Journal of Manufacturing Processes 155 (2025) 820–830 824

[PAGE 6] [35,36]. The authors attributed this phenomenon to the shift of non- linear focus, which could be calculated using extended Marburger's formula [37]. The longest filament-induced damage was observed at a fluence level of 50 J/cm2. Further increase in laser fluence resulted in shorter and less pronounced damage, originating closer to the glass surface (see Fig. 5d). At fluences of 73 J/cm2 or higher, glass surface was strongly damaged, indicating that the ablation threshold at the surface had been exceeded (see Fig. 5a). As a result, filament formation inside the glass weakened with increasing fluence (see Fig. 5d). Furthermore, at fluences above 125 J/cm2, filaments inside the glass were no longer observed. The results show that the significant increase in milling efficiency observed for GHz burst milling was primarily caused by intensified surface cracking and chipping (see Fig. 4c). This shifted the dominating material removal mechanism from ablation to glass fragmentation. The surface damage was followed by additional volumetric damage caused by the laser beam filamentation inside the glass material (see Fig. 5). Filamentation-induced damage could potentially weaken the subsurface structural integrity, promoting even more intense glass fragmentation. 3.2. Fused silica ablation with BiBurst regime To improve the milling efficiency even further, we investigated the use of an even higher number of sub-pulses in the BiBurst regime. For the brevity, the BiBurst regime will be defined by two parameters: the letter P, which represents the number of sub-pulses within a single GHz burst, and the letter N, which indicates the number of GHz bursts repeated at an MHz repetition rate. For example, the BiBurst regime with two GHz bursts, each containing three sub-pulses (see Fig. 2), is referred to as the P3N2 BiBurst regime. Fused silica milling efficiencies using BiBurst regimes are presented in Fig. 6. Similar trends were observed when comparing the GHz burst and BiBurst regimes. Specifically, for regimes with a total number of sub-pulses S (S = P × N) up to 40, milling efficiency constantly increased as fluence decreased. Furthermore, with both regimes, the highest milling efficiencies were obtained at similar fluences: for S values of 10, 15, and 40, the optimal fluence was approximately 36 J/cm2. However, the maximum milling efficiencies were generally lower in the BiBurst regime for S ≤40 (see Figs. 4a and 6). It is important to note that the maximum number of sub-pulses comprising a GHz burst was 40 and higher S values for GHz burst regime were not investigated. The maximum efficiencies for regimes with S ≤40 are compared in Table 1. Overall, for total sub-pulse numbers S from 4 to 10 and 15 to 40, the maximum efficiencies in the BiBurst regime were up to 2 and 3.2 times lower, respectively. The only exception was the P20N2 regime, where material removal predominantly occurred through glass fracturing. In this case, the efficiency reached a maximum value of 3.20 ± 0.61 mm3/ min/W, approximately 1.2 times greater than the maximum efficiency observed in the GHz burst regime. Nevertheless, the lower efficiencies observed in the BiBurst regime for bursts containing less than 40 sub-pulses were attributed to different energy deposition times. In the GHz burst regime, all sub-pulses were emitted at an interval of 470 ps, ensuring laser energy deposition into the material within a relatively narrow temporal window. In contrast, Fig. 5. (a) Top-view of craters formed using GHz burst regime. (b) Top-view of filamentation-induced subsurface damage beneath the formed craters. (c) Top-view image of crater formed using the non-burst regime. (d) Side-view of filamentation-induced damage beneath the glass surface formed using GHz bursts. Z values indicate the depth of shown modifications relative to the glass surface, where Z = 0 (panels a and c) correspond to glass surface. Negative Z values (panel b) denote the distance from the glass surface to the uppermost point of subsurface damage (filament). In GHz burst mode, each crater was formed using five GHz bursts, each consisting of 10 sub-pulses. In non-burst mode, 5 pulses were irradiated into a spot. L. Zubauskas et al. Journal of Manufacturing Processes 155 (2025) 820–830 825