[PAGE 1] Ceramics International 48 (2022) 9805–9816 Available online 20 December 2021 0272-8842/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd and Techna Group S.r.l. All rights reserved. High quality full ablation cutting and stealth dicing of silica glass using picosecond laser Bessel beam with burst mode Kai Liao a,b,c, Wenjun Wang a,b,*, Xuesong Mei a,b, Bin Liu a,b a State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, No. 99, Yanxiang Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710054, China b Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robots, Xi’an Jiaotong University, No. 28, Xianning West Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710049, China c Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, National University of Singapore, 9 Engineering Drive 1, 117575, Singapore A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Laser cutting Bessel beam Burst mode Defocusing distance Roughness A B S T R A C T Glass cutting is widely used in many fields, such as aerospace and integrated electronics. To meet requirements of high-quality glass cutting, methods of full ablation cutting and stealth dicing of silica glass using picosecond laser Bessel beam are studied in this paper. Position synchronized output function of laser source and burst mode (BM) can flexibly adjust drilling spacing and the number of sub-pulses during processing. Through experimental research and theoretical analyses, effect of hole spacing, BM, laser power, and defocusing distance on the roughness of the cross-sections of cutting samples are investigated. The optimal combination of full ablation cutting parameters is obtained with the minimum roughness of the cross-section of 355 nm. To expand the application range of Bessel beam glass cutting, stealth dicing process is developed. Process parameters selection strategy of stealth dicing is obtained. Main parameter that affects the effect of stealth dicing is the defocusing distance. Aforementioned methods may provide simple, efficient, and high-quality full ablation cutting and stealth dicing technologies for glass materials. 1. Introduction Due to their excellent physical and chemical properties, hard-brittle and transparent materials (such as glass) have been widely employed in consumer electronics, integrated electronics, Micro-Electromechanical Systems (MEMS), photovoltaics, microfluidics, flexible display, and other industries in recent years [1–7]. In the aerospace field, silica glass is widely used as a critical component of the inertial instrument, such as quartz vibrating beam accelerometers, quartz pendulums, and MEMS gyroscopes [8,9]. During the manufacturing process of such compo­ nents, the glass material needs to be cut according to the manufacturing requirements. The key to obtaining good glass cutting quality is reducing the edge chipping and the roughness of the cross-sections of glass cutting sam­ ples. The traditional glass cutting method mainly employs diamond grinding wheel cutting. However, its cutting quality is relatively poor and not suitable for precision device processing [10]. Non-traditional glass cutting methods include water jet processing and laser process­ ing [11–15]. In recent years, due to its high-precision, non-contact, and high-energy-density, ultrafast laser processing such as hybrid laser precision engineering has become a research hotspot in glass processing [16–20]. Gaussian laser direct ablation cutting method can be used to avoid subsequent cutting processing. However, the ablation threshold of silica glass is relatively high and the Rayleigh length of the Gaussian beam is relatively short. Therefore, the material removal rate in a single scan is quite low. Complete cutting requires repeated scans [21,22]. This significantly reduces the processing efficiency. Due to its long non-diffraction length, the Bessel beam has advantages in glass cutting. Mischik et al. [23] used ultrafast laser Bessel beams to cut glass and sapphire. By adjusting the energy deposition, the heat-affected zone of cutting sample was narrowed, the sidewall quality was improved, and the cutting trajectory control was more accurate. Even though the author proved the beneficial effects of Bessel beams on glass cutting, he did not provide specific influence and mechanism explanations of the process parameters. Shin et al. [24] used femtosecond laser Bessel beams to cut thin glass via internal scribing and mechanical breakage. The effect of laser energy and cutting methods on the sample and edge cross-section morphology strength were studied. However, the focus of this paper was the strength of glass after cutting. Therefore, the dis­ cussion on the influence of Bessel beam cutting process parameters on * Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, No. 99, Yanxiang Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710054, China. E-mail address: wenjunwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (W. Wang). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Ceramics International journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ceramint https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2021.12.182 Received 17 September 2021; Received in revised form 6 December 2021; Accepted 16 December 2021

[PAGE 2] Ceramics International 48 (2022) 9805–9816 9806 processing quality is not complete. Chuang et al. [25] studied the effect of drilling hole distance in the Bessel beam cutting process on glass separation as well as pressure and temperature control during the fracture process. However, the adjustment and effect of its laser pro­ cessing parameters were not discussed in detail. Methods based on Bessel beams combined with temporary pulse shaping are widely employed in glass micro-nano processing, such as drilling [26,27] and micro-channels fabrication [28]. These studies have confirmed that laser spatiotemporal shaping has a beneficial effect on glass material processing. However, the Bessel laser processing method based on spatiotemporal shaping is not sufficiently investigated in the field of glass cutting. Mishchik et al. [29] theoretically confirmed that converting a single laser pulse energy into multiple sub-pulses with a time delay can significantly enhance the energy deposition in the ma­ terial. Consequently, this can achieve high-speed and high-quality glass cutting. The obtained theoretical results were experimentally confirmed. However, the method for selecting specific experimental parameters was not provided. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct a more detailed study on parameter selection when using Bessel laser with a burst mode for glass cutting. Stealth dicing technology mainly utilizes a Gaussian beam to modify internal materials by focusing the laser energy inside the material with a high numerical aperture objective. The material is separated by an external force to avoid damaging the material surface [30]. In this method, the modification depth of a single scan inside the material is too small. Therefore, multiple scans are required to meet the segmentation requirements. This, in turn, will reduce the processing efficiency [31]. Moreover, the cross-section of the glass sample produces a corrugated structure with a period equal to the scanning interval. Therefore, the roughness of the cut section is relatively large [23]. Although the multi-focus stealth dicing technology can avoid the effect of multiple scans on the processing efficiency, its optical path is relatively compli­ cated, and the roughness of the cross-section is relatively large [32]. In this paper, an experimental study on the picosecond laser Bessel beam used to cut a 500 μm silica glass is carried out. The effect of hole spacing, burst mode, laser power, and defocusing distance on the surface roughness of the cross-sections are investigated. Defocusing distance is defined as the distance between the front side of the glass sample and the focus of the Bessel beam focal depth. When the central section is located below the upper surface of the glass, the value is negative. Otherwise, it is positive. An optimal parameter combination is obtained. Lastly, based on the research of full ablation cutting, this method is extended to the Table 1 Physical properties of fused silica glass. Density (g/ cm3) Refractive index Modulus of elasticity (GPa) Inflection resistance (MPa) Compressive strength (MPa) Thermal conductivity (W/ m/K) Thermal expansion coefficient (1E−6/K) 2.201 1.5 77.8 65 80–1000 1.46 0.5 Fig. 1. Schematic representation of experimental setup for Bessel beam micromachining: (a) schematic diagram of the light path, and (b) set up for Bessel beam generation. K. Liao et al.

[PAGE 3] Ceramics International 48 (2022) 9805–9816 9807 research of stealth dicing of glass. A good cutting effect was subse­ quently achieved. 2. Experimental investigation 2.1. Materials In this paper, a silica glass plate with a thickness of 500 μm is used for cutting. The physical properties of the silica glass are shown in Table 1. 2.2. Methods A high repetition rate picosecond laser (Blazer, Grace Laser) with a pulse duration of 10 ps is selected. The maximum average laser power is 20 W and the maximum laser repetition rate (LRR) is 100 kHz. The wavelength of the laser is 1064 nm, and the laser source has a Gaussian energy density distribution with a beam diameter of 2 mm (M2＜1.3). A 3X beam expander is used to expand the laser beam, which can operate in single pulse mode or burst mode. The schematic diagram of the light path is shown in Fig. 1(a). The primary Bessel beam is produced with an axicon and projected to the focal region using a telescope system (the secondary Bessel beam). The laser microfabrication technique used to cut thin glasses is based on the use of a zero-order pulsed Bessel beam. In this paper, a fused silica axicon with the base angle γ = 2◦and refractive index na = 1.45 is selected. The cone angle θ of the primary Bessel beam is only linked with base angle γ of the axicon and refractive index na of the axicon. The aforementioned can be expressed as: θ = arcsin (na × sinγ)-γ ≈(na-1) γ [33]. The incident Gaussian beam radius ω0 is 3 mm. The primary Bessel beam is typically featured by a central diameter of 50 μm and 25 cm Bessel zone in length (L). Thus, to cut a few hundred microns thick samples, the non-diffractive length of the primary Bessel beam is demagnified by a telescope system (4f system). This system is composed of a lens (with the focal length f1 = 150 mm) and a microscope objective (20X, with the equivalent focal length f2 = 9 mm) (Fig. 1(b)). With a cone angle of θB = 15◦, the resulting secondary Bessel beam is featured by a central diameter of 1.6 μm and 1 mm Bessel zone in length (l). A relevant theoretical calculation equation is provided in a previously conducted investigation [29,33]. Moreover, a schematic diagram of Bessel beam generation based on axicon is shown in Fig. 1(b). The beam is irradiated vertically downwards to the silica glass cutting sample located on a 3D motorized platform that can be repositioned with micron precision in all directions. The spatial light intensity distribution of the Bessel beam based on axicon can be calculated as [34]: IB(r, z) = 2kπI0sin 2 θz⋅exp(−2sin 2 θz2 ω02 )⋅J0(kr sin θ) (1) where IB is the light intensity of the primary Bessel beam, I0 is the light intensity of the incident laser beam, k is the wavenumber, z is the propagation distance of the beam in the axial direction, r is the propa­ gation distance of the beam in the radial direction, and J0 is the zero- order Bessel function. After passing through the telescope system, the light intensity dis­ tribution of the secondary Bessel beam can be obtained as [35]: I ′ B(r, z) = 2kπI0sin 2[arctan(tan θ ⋅M)]z ⋅exp(−2sin 2[arctan(tan θ⋅M)]z2 ω02M2 ) ⋅J0 2(kr sin[arctan(tan θ ⋅M)]) (2) where I ′ B is the light intensity of the secondary Bessel beam, and M is the magnification factor of the telescope system whose value can be Fig. 2. Intensity distribution of the Bessel beam: (a) cross-sectional distribution of the primary Bessel beam, (b) intensity distribution of the primary Bessel beam along the propagation plane, (c) cross-sectional intensity distribution of the secondary Bessel beam, and (d) intensity distribution of the secondary Bessel beam along the propagation plane. K. Liao et al.

[PAGE 4] Ceramics International 48 (2022) 9805–9816 9808 obtained as M = f1/f2. By using Eqs. (1) and (2), the corresponding light intensity distri­ bution can be theoretically simulated, as shown in Fig. 2. It should be pointed out that, to clearly show the light intensity distribution char­ acteristics of the Bessel beam, the light intensity values in all figures are normalized. The position synchronized output (PSO) function compares the po­ sition by collecting real-time encoder feedback and by synchronizing the phase with the laser synchronous output signal. During all stages of the motion trajectory, including acceleration, deceleration, and uniform stage, the laser is triggered at a constant space (rather than time) in­ terval. Therefore, the pulse energy is uniformly applied to the processed object (Fig. 3a–d). Burst Mode is a pulse train output that is generated by selecting multiple high-frequency sub-pulses with the same repetition frequency as the seed source through a controlled optical switch [23,36]. More­ over, the time interval between adjacent pulses in the pulse train en­ velope is determined by the repetition frequency of the seed source. Some laser sources, including the laser source used in this experiment, also increase the adjustment function of the energy intensity of each sub-pulse in the pulse packet. The total energy of the entire laser packet, which is determined by the laser power and repetition rate, is fixed. In the burst mode equipped with the laser source used in this paper, the energy of each sub-pulse sequentially decreases (Table 2). When the number of sub-pulses is 1 (B1), a traditional unshaped laser pulse is obtained. The unique advantage of the burst Mode is that it tunes the number of sub-pulses in the burst envelope and the time interval of the sub-pulse (Δτ). In addition, it also maintains the maximum output power of the ultrafast laser. Basic information of different burst modes used in this experiment is shown in Table 2. The glass cutting samples processed by different parameter combi­ nations were obtained. A laser scanning confocal microscope (OLYMPUS, OLS4000, Japan) and a color 3D laser scanning microscope (KEYENCE, VK9700K, Japan) were employed. Morphologies of the glass cutting samples cross-sections were observed and the roughness of the cross-sections was measured. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Full ablation cutting In this paper, the use of a Bessel beam to cut 500 μm thick silica glass by drilling tightly arranged small holes on the glass surface is investi­ gated. The process of Bessel beam cutting silica glass is shown in Fig. 4. This method first forms a perforated structure by picosecond laser drilling and the average hole diameter is 1.927 μm. Then, crack prop­ agation is induced through external stress to form a continuous path. By carefully designing the size and density of these microholes and employing reliable separation methods, it is considered that crack propagation occurs in a controlled manner. In other words, by choosing a suitable process strategy, the crack can start and spread at the edge of the laser drilling, and will eventually be stopped by the next hole [31]. Glass cutting is achieved by employing the aforementioned method. This technology can be applied to more complicated internal shape cutting. Direct punching form has high processing efficiency, and the pro­ cessed hole diameter largely depends on the spot diameter as well as the ablation threshold. Therefore, holes with smaller diameters can be processed [5,37]. Rotary drilling can increase the roundness of the hole. However, the diameter is larger, and efficiency is lower [38]. Since the research topic of this paper is achieving glass cutting through surface drilling, smaller hole diameter is conducive for higher cutting quality. Therefore, the drilling form used in this experiment is direct punching with Bessel beams. This form can improve processing efficiency and ensure the better cutting quality. Fig. 3. The schematic diagram of the PSO function and the Burst mode: (a) linear trajectory (without PSO function), (b) linear trajectory (with PSO function), (c) curve trajectory (without PSO function)), (d) curve trajectory (including PSO function), and (e) Burst modes used for the experiment. Table 2 Burst modes used for the experiment. Burst mode B1 B2 B3 B4 Number of sub-pulses 1 2 3 4 Energy ratio of sub-pulses 1 3:2 4:3:2 5:4:3:2 Δτ (ns) 50 50 50 50 Fig. 4. Schematics of the proposed glass crack propagation control and separation method. K. Liao et al.

[PAGE 5] Ceramics International 48 (2022) 9805–9816 9809 When the drilling distance is properly selected and laser perforation capability is sufficient, the glass can be automatically separated, i.e., full ablation cutting is achieved. Otherwise, external stress is required to achieve glass splits, which reduces the cutting quality of the glass [30, 39]. Laser drilling affects the surface quality of the cut in various forms, such as surface modification, generation of microcracks, and changes in material properties due to photolysis and pyrolysis effects [40]. In addition, drill hole spacing affects the generation of crack propagation paths and consequently glass splinters. In this paper, the effect of processing parameters, such as hole spacing, laser power, burst mode, and focusing position (defocusing distance) on glass cutting quality is investigated. It should be pointed out that the LRR is 100 kHz, and the scanning speed is determined by the two factors of the hole spacing as well as the PSO function. Investigation regarding the effect of hole spacing on the glass cutting effect was first carried out. The laser power was 14 W, the burst mode was taken as B2, and the defocusing distance was taken as −200 μm. Then, by applying the PSO function, the hole spacing on the glass surface was adjusted from 2 μm to 6 μm with the adjustment interval of 1 μm. Glass surface morphologies after laser processing with different hole spacing are shown in Fig. 5. Since the processed samples are easily separated by mechanical stress, process optimization of laser cutting is mainly investigated in this paper. According to the fracture mechanics theory, if the stress intensity factor or strain energy release rate of glass exceeds the fracture tough­ ness or critical strain energy release rate of the processed material, crack propagation will occur. High microholes density can promote glass cracking [25]. However, this does not mean that high density will result Fig. 5. Images of the upper surface and cross-sections of glass samples with different hole spacing: (a, a1) hole spacing of 2 μm, (b, b1) hole spacing of 3 μm, (c, c1) hole spacing of 4 μm, (d, d1) hole spacing of 5 μm, (e, e1) hole spacing of 6 μm, (f) enlarged view of the image (c), and (f1) edge chipping of silica glass cutting sample with a hole spacing of 4 μm. K. Liao et al.

[PAGE 6] Ceramics International 48 (2022) 9805–9816 9810 in high cutting quality. When hole spacings are 2 μm or 3 μm, the crack growth is uncontrollable due to insufficient prestress (Fig. 5a and b). The aforementioned can be explained by the dust and heat left by the front processing of glass micro holes. These parameters affect the drilling of the next hole, thereby resulting in poor processing results. Due to the large spacing between the two holes (Fig. 5d and e), the crack propa­ gation cannot form a completely closed path when the hole spacing is 5 μm or 6 μm. Although these samples can achieve splits, cross-sectional morphologies are defective (Fig. 5d1 and e1). Therefore, 4 μm is selected as the optimal hole spacing. Since the edge chipping of the glass sample cut by the Bessel beam is relatively small or almost nonexistent (Fig. 5f1), the roughness (Ra) of the cross-section is selected to characterize the processing quality of silica glass cutting samples [21]. Ra is one of the most widely used pa­ rameters is the mean of the average height difference for the average surface. It provides for stable results as the parameter is not significantly influenced by scratches, contamination, and measurement noise [41]. Four profiles are uniformly selected (the interval is 100 μm) on the glass section, as shown by the red lines marked P1–P4 in Fig. 6(a). Profile measured by a laser confocal microscope which takes P3 as an example is shown in Fig. 6(b). The corresponding line roughness Ra is 387 nm. The roughness values of P1, P2, and P4 were measured by the same method. Moreover, the surface roughness of the section is also measured. The line roughness at different positions can characterize the effect of light intensity changes on the morphology of each area of the cross-section. The average line roughness and surface roughness can characterize the overall quality of the cross-section. The surface roughness values of cutting samples were also provided to characterize the quality of the entire cross-section. These values were obtained by employing the rectangular area with both length and width of 500 μm obtained through a laser scanning confocal microscope as the evaluation area. The effect of hole spacing on the roughness of cross-sections of silica glass cutting samples is shown in Fig. 7. As the hole spacing increases, the roughness of cross-sections of glass cutting samples first decreases and then increases. When the hole spacing is 4 μm, the roughness is the smallest. The results are consistent with the analyses carried out in Section 3.1. (1) Influence of burst mode on cutting quality Using a laser source in burst mode allows the material to be irradi­ ated with closely spaced pulse packets instead of a single pulse. The burst mode parameters used in this experiment are shown in Table 2. In addition, it can be noticed that the total energy of the pulse train in the burst mode remains unchanged, i.e., the energy of all sub-pulses is equal to the energy of the unshaped laser single pulse. Therefore, when the number of sub-pulses is higher than 1, the energy of a single sub-pulse in the burst mode is considerably reduced. Morphologies of the glass sec­ tions under different burst modes and the laser power of 14 W, hole spacing of 4 μm, and defocusing distance of −200 μm are shown in Fig. 8. Cross-sectional roughness variation with the burst mode is shown in Fig. 9. When the B2 burst mode is adopted, the average line roughness and surface roughness of the cross-section are minimal. The per-packet energy used in this experiment is 140 μJ (14 W, 100 kHz). Since the Bessel beam first rapidly strengthens and then gradually weakens, the upper surface is over-ablated while the lower surface is not fully perforated. Since the total energy of the pulse packet remains the same, an increase in the number of pulses causes the energy of a single sub-pulse to decrease. This can effectively reduce the cracking of the upper surface material caused by excessive ablation. High-intensity picosecond laser pulses generate plasma through multiphoton and avalanche ionization, thereby causing structural changes in the material. The level of electron density is directly related Fig. 7. Effect of hole spacing on the roughness of silica glass cutting samples cross-sections. Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of the calculation method for the roughness of silica glass sample section: (a) cross-sectional morphology of the silica glass cutting sample and profile selection for line roughness measurement, and (b) line roughness measurement of P3 in Fig. 6(a). K. Liao et al.