[PAGE 1] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 5 / 2 March 2020 / Optics Express 6552 Facilitated glass separation by asymmetric Bessel-like beams MICHAEL JENNE,1,2,* DANIEL FLAMM,1 KEYOU CHEN,1 MARCEL SCHÄFER,1 MALTE KUMKAR,1 AND STEFAN NOLTE2,3 1TRUMPF Laser- und Systemtechnik GmbH, Johann-Maus-Strasse 2, 71254 Ditzingen, Germany 2Institute of Applied Physics, Abbe Center of Photonics, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Albert-Einstein-Strasse 15, 07745 Jena, Germany 3Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Optics and Precision Engineering, Albert-Einstein-Strasse 7, 07745 Jena, Germany *michael.jenne@trumpf.com Abstract: The modiﬁcation of transparent materials is enabled by focused ultrashort laser pulses. Single pass processing up to several millimeters can be achieved by the usage of elongated beam proﬁles. We studied the mechanical separability in dependence of the material thickness. As simulations show, asymmetric beam proﬁles can cause modiﬁcations with preferential direction reducing the necessary breaking force. Pump-probe microscopy is implemented to examine the laser-matter-interaction. We present a measured 3D-reconstruction of the transient interaction inside the material and elucidate the desired crack formation. We demonstrate beam shaping concepts to create a new, eﬃcient and robust class of Bessel-like beams, which can be used to achieve a preferred crack direction. We verify the concept by modiﬁcation and separation of silicate glasses. © 2020 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement 1. Introduction The invention and continuous development of ultrashort pulsed lasers has led to miscellaneous applications in a very short period of time. The combination of short pulse durations in the range of femto- to picoseconds and high intensities facilitate the processing of almost every material, not limited by its aggregate state or band gap [1–3], and even opens the ﬁeld to novel research technologies such as time-resolved measurements of brain cells or 3D printing of nanostructures to the meso scale [4,5]. Especially the demand to process transparent materials has increased vastly due to the fast-growing markets of semiconductors and consumer electronics. Beside ablation and structuring processes, the cutting of displays and safety glasses is enabled [6–8]. Traditional separation techniques such as water-jet-cutting deliver reliable and constant results, but laser-based processing oﬀers the possibility to reduce extensive and expensive post-processing [9]. The initiating process is the nonlinear absorption of laser radiation to bridge the material’s band gap. The interaction zone is spatially conﬁned to few micrometers due to the high intensities, typically achieved by focusing of the laser radiation and short interaction times. The interaction steps consist of absorption and ionization mechanisms, that result in a free electron plasma. The type of permanent modiﬁcation of the material is authoritatively determined by the choice of laser parameters, which in turn determine the relaxation channels [1,10,11]. Therefore, sensitive adjustment of the laser parameters is necessary to create the desired modiﬁcation of the material. Several successive modiﬁcations can be inscribed in the material. There they form a contour along which the sample can be separated. While straight lines present the simplest form of a cutting edge, complex contours like circles or inclined cutting edges for tilted glass samples are also possible [8,12,13]. Recent studies show the targeted weighting of beam proﬁles by spatial frequency ﬁltering techniques or by tilting individual optical components to create a preferential #387545 https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.387545 Journal © 2020 Received 7 Jan 2020; accepted 27 Jan 2020; published 19 Feb 2020

[PAGE 2] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 5 / 2 March 2020 / Optics Express 6553 crack orientation [14,15]. Although preliminary modiﬁcations tests on glasses with a thickness of several hundred micrometers indicate the high potential of a tailored crack orientation [14–16], additional concepts for the treatment of thicker glasses are needed. Separation occurs typically in a second process step and is of equal importance to sustain chipping-free cutting edges and high success-rates. Possible separation methods utilize the precise application of mechanical force, localized thermal heat gradients or chemical interaction from wet-etching-processes [17–19]. In this paper we purposefully investigate the separability of laser-modiﬁed material with diﬀerent glasses of diﬀerent thicknesses. The study implies the mechanical separation of glasses beforehand processed by single pass laser modiﬁcation with Bessel-like beam proﬁles. Simulations show the impact of changing the modifying laser beam’s geometrical shape. We use pump-probe microscopy to further elucidate the modiﬁcation process enabling the subsequent separation process, to understand the interaction of newly generated beam proﬁles with the material and crack generation at its heart. The microscope is adapted to transient absorption and polarization measurements under sample movement as well as tomographic reconstruction of the advanced beam proﬁles. The successful facilitated separability concludes the paper. 2. Experimental setup 2.1. Laser systems Two laser systems have been used to perform the cleaving modiﬁcations. A 20 W lab-version based on the TRUMPF TruMicro Series 2000 oﬀers the ﬂexibility to use repetition rates up to 1 MHz and pulse trains of up to 8 pulses in a burst conﬁguration with 20 ns between consecutive pulses. The pulse duration can be adjusted electronically between 300 fs and 20 ps. The second system comprises a TRUMPF TruMicro Series 5000 disk laser modiﬁed to generate pulse energies up to 2 mJ at a repetition rate of 50 kHz. This system is set to a pulse duration of 3 ps and is primarily used to process glasses with thicknesses of 2 mm and above. The wavelength of both processing lasers is λ = 1030 nm. In situ diagnostics by means of pump-probe microscopy is realized by combining either one of the processing lasers with a third laser system. The latter is based on a frequency doubled TRUMPF TruMicro Series 2000 system operated at λ = 515 nm with a pulse duration of 300 fs and used for observation (probe). Key feature of this arrangement is the internal synchronization of the lasers due to a common seed module with independently selectable pulses. This provides the possibility to temporally shift the pulses in multiples of 20 ns whilst maintaining synchronization. An additional mechanical delay line is used to thoroughly cover the remaining time span between two seed pulses. 2.2. Methodology The laser-matter-interaction zone is recorded transversely to the processing laser radiation in a transmission light microscope setup. The region of interest is imaged by an objective and tube lens directly onto a camera chip. Further, the microscope can be extended to perform polarization sensitive measurements, which allows the transient detection of birefringence, e.g. pressure waves or thermal stress. More information about the pump-probe setup can be found in [20]. Depending of the prevailing emphasis of the respective measurement, the system oﬀers the possibility to switch between a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) camera and a high-speed camera (HSC) with recording rates in the range of 100 kHz. The single- shot measurements with the CMOS camera provides the ﬁner resolution and pixel density compared to the HSC and is thus used to analyze the beam proﬁle and its absorption mechanisms. Accordingly, the HSC is chosen, if the emphasis is on the interaction and cumulative action of the individual pulses and the immediate material reaction, such as the laser processing under sample

[PAGE 3] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 5 / 2 March 2020 / Optics Express 6554 movement. In order to enable the reader to assign the displayed graphs as easily and intuitively as possible, each measurement conﬁguration or simulation method is assigned its own color scheme representation. The schemes are created based on the cubehelix approach presented by D. Green [21]. 2.3. Beam shaping elements The concept for shaping non-diﬀracting beams with a variety of transverse intensity proﬁles (cf. Sec. 5) are realized by diﬀerent beam shaping elements. The high-energy and high-power experiments for cleaving thick glasses, cf. Sec. 3, are carried out by static diﬀractive optical elements [22]. The eﬃcacy proof of our concept by pump-probe microscopy (Sec. 5), however, required greater ﬂexibility, e.g. in the variation of beam orientation. The liquid crystal-on-silicon- based spatial light modulator (SLM Hamamatsu X1313803-03) used here was illuminated with signiﬁcantly lower optical power (highest average powers <50 W, peak ﬂuences <0.01 J/cm2). However, the ability to ﬂexibly change the holographic transmission function comes at the expense of reduced eﬃciency. The power loss in unwanted diﬀraction orders depends strongly on the phase distribution and reaches ≈20% in our cases. The shaped non-diﬀracting beams are imaged with demagniﬁcation into the transparent workpiece [22]. The advantage of using a telescope lies in the variability of the exact length of the Bessel-like beam, which we adapt to the thickness of the material to be cut [22]. 3. Cleaving of glass The excellent features of Bessel-like beams for glass cutting applications have been widely discussed in literature. [8,13,17,23]. The wave-optical simulation of such a beam-proﬁle is depicted in Fig. 1 (a) and shows the most distinctive feature, i.e., the ratio between transversal and longitudinal extension in the micrometer- and millimeter-regime, respectively. Therefore, it is possible to precisely modify the whole thickness of glass along a contour by stringing together multiple pulses. Recent literature reports on modiﬁcation and cleaving for glass thicknesses in the range of (8 . . . 10) mm [17,23,24]. We performed a feasibility study of aluminosilicate, borosilicate and soda-lime glass with diﬀerent thicknesses. Here, we were able to modify and break glasses of up to 12 mm. The result of a single pass modiﬁcation of 12 mm soda-lime glass and subsequent separation with a typical cutting pliers is shown in Fig. 1 (b). The mean roughness Sa of less then µm conﬁrms consistent quality throughout the sample thickness and suitability of Bessel-like beams for cleaving applications. A detailed description of the optical setup used to perform these experiment can be found in [22]. The processing occurred at a pulse energy of 1.5 mJ evenly spread over a 4-pulse burst train (17 ns between consecutive pulses) at a pulse duration of 3 ps. The spatial pulse distance was set to 3 µm at a processing speed of 130 mm/s. The forces necessary to cleave borosilicate glass (SCHOTT boroﬂoat 33) and the corresponding bending stress are presented in Fig. 1 (c). The beam length and other processing parameters were set similar to parameters described above to cleave the 12 mm thick glasses in order to ensure the comparability between the thicknesses. We used a four point bending tester by Instron (5944) to perform the measurements. The maximum applicable force to separate the samples was limited to 1 kN which set the maximum separable thickness to 6.5 mm. The glass sample geometry is 60 mm × 25 mm × d, whereby d denotes the glass thickness [cf. Fig. 1 (c)]. The modiﬁcations were inscribed along the 20 mm axis. The y-scale shows the logarithmically displayed force necessary for separation, hereafter referred to as separability, and the corresponding bending stress until separation. We point out, that the separability (N) is dependant on the sample geometry and the force-applying lever. Each parameter was repeated three times as a trade-oﬀ between diminishing variations and evaluation times. The measurements show that bending stress remains approximately the same, but force scales linearly with the increasing thickness. We

[PAGE 4] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 5 / 2 March 2020 / Optics Express 6555 Fig. 1. (a) Simulated intensity distribution of a symmetrical Bessel-like beam used for glass modiﬁcation with information about the possible size ranges. The result of its application to modify a 12 mm thick soda-lime glass in a single pass conﬁguration and subsequent separation (b) shows an homogeneous cutting edge. (c) Measurements of bending stress (red) and force necessary for separation (blue) for diﬀerent glass thicknesses. expect the enhanced bending stress at thickness of d = 1 mm due to the increased ﬂexibility of thinner glasses. Recent calculations by Feuer et al. show that the modiﬁcation length can even be further increased [23]. In combination with state-of-the-art USP laser systems reaching multiple milli-joules per burst and average output powers up to 1.4 kW [25], glass modiﬁcation of several centimeter thickness might be possible soon. This further underlines the necessity to ﬁnd a way to reduce the force necessary for separation with otherwise the same quality conditions. 4. Stress simulations The shape of the beam proﬁle takes an important role in search for an universal approach to reduce separability. Thus, we simulated the response of glass, which was previously modiﬁed by diﬀerent beam proﬁles, being subject to mechanical stress. The proﬁles comprise a typical symmetrical shape as well as an elliptical cross-sectional area and diﬀerent orientations thereof. The material of the simulations is silica glass, since it is the basic component for all the glasses processed within this paper. Although the simulations show noticeable diﬀerences dependent on the chosen beam proﬁle, we point out that ﬁne tuning of laser parameters and processing strategies, e.g., pulse duration and pulse energy or repetition rate and velocity of the sample, will nevertheless be necessary to optimize the process in accordance to the glass composition and thickness. The cleaving application can be divided into the process steps modiﬁcation and subsequent separation. Single pulse modiﬁcations by symmetric beam proﬁles as shown in Fig. 1 (a) will generate statistically distributed cracks in an isotropic medium such as glass if the deposited energy is higher than the material threshold to withstand damage. By inducing an asymmetry to the beam proﬁle, the interaction with the material will experience an asymmetry-dependent preferential direction. We will discuss this immediate material-response in the following section. We use the ﬁnite element method (COMSOL) to analyze stress and strain during the mechanical separation as the second process step. The results for diﬀerent modiﬁcation orientations in a thin fused silica plate of (50 × 50 × 0.55) mm3 are shown in Fig. 2. Thereby, we assume that the absorption and subsequent free electron plasma formation and relaxation of a single laser pulse will modify the material homogeneously according to the incoming beam proﬁle. The base area of the circular (radius of √ 2 mm) and elliptical (semi-axes of 1 mm × 2 mm) proﬁles are

[PAGE 5] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 5 / 2 March 2020 / Optics Express 6556 chosen to be equal in order to ensure the comparability between the simulations. The proﬁle geometry was stretched by a factor of ≈1000 compared to the real dimensions of the expected beam proﬁle’s cross section. Thus, the qualitative stress distribution will be the same. The interaction of ultrashort laser pulses with matter can alter its features [26]. The behavior under stress impact is key element in our simulation. In particular, the elasticity of the glass in relation to the modiﬁed glass determines the internal stress build-up. This feature is described by Young’s modulus. Here, we assume that Young’s modulus of fused silica will decrease after ultrashort laser interaction based on the studies of Athanasiou and Bellouard [27]. Fig. 2. FEM simulation of von Mises stress distribution at the surface for symmetrical proﬁle and elliptical orientations (0◦, 30◦, 60◦, 90◦). The arrows indicate the direction of applied force. Depicted are the von Mises stress gradients on the surface for planar force application of F = 1 Pa in opposite y-direction along the two edges of the sample. Therefore, only tensile forces are applied. In addition to the simulations presented in Fig. 2, we performed similar calculations for boundary limitation of perfect interaction between the laser pulse and the material with a vanishing small Young’s modulus, i.e. a complete void inside the material. These calculations show basically identical results as already presented and are therefore not shown separately. The simulations reveal a distinct dependency of the geometrical shape and its orientation to the predominant direction and intensity proﬁle. For perpendicular orientation of the long axis of an ellipse to the applied force, the maximum stress can be enhanced compared to the distribution induced by a cylindrical proﬁle. Thus, the probability to generate a crack along this axis increases. Advanced processing strategies for separation along arbitrary contours will depend on this fact. 5. Asymmetric elongated beam proﬁles causing preferential crack orientation The implementation of asymmetric elongated beam proﬁles has been discussed in the context of glass processing for diﬀractive and non-diﬀractive beam proﬁles [14,15,28]. The given examples use diﬀerent techniques to generate the asymmetrical beam proﬁle. One approach is spatial frequency ﬁltering which results in the central mode as well as corresponding side-lobes, leading to an elliptical shape. Unfortunately, this is at the expense of eﬃciency because parts of the initial laser power are blocked [14]. Other approaches use controlled introduction of aberrations [15,28]. These processes would be challenging to handle in an industrial environment in terms of process stability. In the following, we present a novel concept for the eﬃcient and robust generation of Bessel-like beams whose radial symmetry of the transverse intensity proﬁle is intentionally broken.

[PAGE 6] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 5 / 2 March 2020 / Optics Express 6557 A simple method for the ﬂexible generation of Bessel-like beams is given by digital-holography [22,29] where the SLM acts as axicon hologram. A radial-symmetric transmission according to Taxi (r) = exp  ıΦaxi (r)  = exp (ıkrr) is displayed. In thin element approximation the radial component of the wavevector kr allows to directly assign a holographic axicon to its refractive counterpart via kr = 2π(n −1) γ/λ, with axicon angle γ and refractive index n [22,29]. The axicon-like elements used within this work exhibit opening angles of γ = (1 . . . 3)◦which corresponds to kr = (50 . . . 150) mm−1. Illumination of these holograms by fundamental Gaussian beams generates Bessel-like beams of zero order. It is well known that minor modiﬁcations of Taxi such as the multiplexing of phase vortices or π-phase jumps allow the generation of Bessel-like beams of higher-order or superposition thereof [22,30]. Here, the required phase modulation Φ is no longer radial symmetric but exhibits additional azimuthal dependencies such as, e.g., constant azimuthal slopes Φ (r, φ) = krr + ℓφ, ℓ∈Z [22,30]. The beam shaping approach pursued within this work to generate asymmetric Bessel-like beams represents a generalization of this concept. Now, the axicon-like phase transmission Tgen = exp (ıΦgen) is characterized by a phase modulation with arbitrary azimuthal dependencies Θ (φ) Φgen (r, φ) = krr + Θ (φ) . (1) In principle, there are no restrictions regarding the exact dependency of Θ (φ). Continuous functions are as conceivable as those containing discrete jumps. The beam proﬁles created in this way are characterized by an enormous diversity regarding the transverse intensity proﬁle while remaining almost all well-known beneﬁcial features of Bessel-like beams (non-diﬀracting, self-healing, natural resistance towards spherical aberrations, etc. [22,31]). This is due to maintaining the constant radial slope ∂Φgen/∂r = kr given by the holographic axicon carrier. For the determination of Θ (φ) an optimization algorithm is applied which starting from Φgen (r, φ) calculates the optical ﬁeld at a well deﬁned propagation distance. Here, an adapted merit function determines the deviations of the actual beam proﬁle and a target intensity distribution. In our case, e.g., an elliptical on-axis intensity distribution, see Fig. 3 (d). To retrieve Φgen (r, φ) that minimizes the deﬁned merit function it may be useful to implement a number of jmax phase disturbances by deﬁning angular segments of position αj, width ∆βj and constant phase oﬀset Θj. As depicted by the selected example of Fig. 3 (c), Φgen (r, φ) is completely determined by the set of parameters  αj, ∆βj, Θj [32]. Examples of elliptical Bessel-like beams (elliptical central spots or an elliptical envelope of main and side lobes, cf. intensity threshold discussion of Sec. 5) and corresponding axicon-like phase transmissions Φgen (r, φ) are depicted in Fig. 3 (d)–3 (f). Here, linear ﬁeld simulations in air show the transverse distributions I (x, y) as well as corresponding longitudinal intensity cross sections I (x, z) proving the non-diﬀracting propagation behavior along several hundred micrometers. Additionally, in order to demonstrate our concept’s high eﬃciency, we state peak intensity values relative to the fundamental Bessel-like beam [cf. Fig. 3 (b)] normalized to unit intensity Ipeak = 1. Please note, that depicted asymmetric beam proﬁles represent only a small selection from a plethora of Bessel-like solutions exhibiting almost arbitrary transverse intensity proﬁles, see Chen et al. [32] for additional information. We employed pump-probe microscopy to gain access to the transient and dynamic interaction of the asymmetric beam proﬁles inside the material. The measurements in Fig. 4 (a) show the optical depth τ = ln (IS/I0), i.e., extinction according to Lambert-Beer’s law [33], for observation transversely to the z- and either x- or y-axis (top or bottom) shown in Fig. 3 (f). All in situ-images throughout this paper are background corrected. The absorption behavior of ultrashort laser pulses inside glass is driven by nonlinear and linear absorption processes [2], whereas the intensity distribution simulations presented in Fig. 3 are solely linear. We expect the absorption to occur at positions where the simulations predict high intensities. By comparison of Fig. 4 (a) with Fig. 3 (f) the excellent agreement between simulations and experiments becomes clear and