[PAGE 1] Research Article Vol. 32, No. 18 / 26 Aug 2024 / Optics Express 32408 Ultrafast dynamics and internal processing mechanism of silica glass under double-pulse femtosecond laser irradiation GUOQI REN, YUSUKE ITO,* REINA YOSHIZAKI, HUIJIE SUN, JUNYA HATTORI, AND NAOHIKO SUGITA Department of Mechanical Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan *y.ito@mfg.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp Abstract: Femtosecond laser-induced plasma filaments have potential for various applications including attosecond physics, spectroscopy, and microprocessing. However, the use of plasma filaments to generate high-aspect-ratio internal modifications remains low-efficiency. Here, we experimentally demonstrated high-efficiency internal processing using plasma filaments induced by a double-pulse femtosecond laser. The processing mechanism was revealed through an investigation of the ultrafast dynamics of plasma filaments in experiments and simulations. We found that the excitation region of the first pulse (P1) exerted a temporal effect on the propagation and absorption of the second pulse (P2) due to the evolution of excited electrons, thus resulting in different processing characterizations. At a smaller inter-pulse delay (IPD), electrons and self-trapped excitons induced by P1 improved the absorption of P2 in the shallow region. Consequently, the main excitation regions of P1 and P2 were separated, resulting in a lower density of energy deposition and weak modifications. Whereas, at a larger IPD, P2 penetrated a deeper region with the relaxation of electrons and excitons induced by P1, leading to a better overlap of excitation regions between P2 and P1, thus improving the density of energy deposition and achieving efficient microprocessing. Besides, at an infinite IPD, P2 behaved like P1, but no modification was obtained owing to the complete energy diffusion of P1. Therefore, controlling the electron dynamic and energy diffusion contributes to the improvement of modification efficiency. Furthermore, the distribution of electron densities on the cross section was estimated to precisely analyze the microprocessing. These results are expected to aid in a better understanding of the interaction mechanism between dielectrics and intense ultrafast lasers and be useful for microprocessing applications. © 2024 Optica Publishing Group under the terms of the Optica Open Access Publishing Agreement 1. Introduction The interaction between femtosecond lasers and media has attracted extensive attention owing to its significance in both fundamental science [1,2] and processing applications [3–5]. Filamentation is a phenomena resulting from the balance between Kerr self-focusing and plasma defocusing during the propagation of an intense femtosecond laser pulse in transparent media [6]. It exhibits great potential in many fields, such as microprocessing [7–9], terahertz wave generation [10,11], remote sensing [12], supercontinuum generation [13], and attosecond physics [14]. In recent decades, the spatiotemporal characteristics of plasma filaments have been extensively investigated using pump-probe shadowgraph [15] and in-line holographic microscopy [16]. Moreover, the excitation and relaxation of electrons [17–19], plasma front propagation [15], and material damage threshold [20] have been further analyzed. Owing to the mechanism of multiphoton absorption, femtosecond laser-induced plasma filaments have been used for waveguide writing [21,22] and microwelding [23] inside transparent #530465 https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.530465 Journal © 2024 Received 17 May 2024; revised 12 Aug 2024; accepted 14 Aug 2024; published 23 Aug 2024

[PAGE 2] Research Article Vol. 32, No. 18 / 26 Aug 2024 / Optics Express 32409 dielectrics. However, efficient generation of an internal modification channel with a high-aspect- ratio in dielectrics remains challenging because of the high requirement of the experimental conditions. A high laser fluence may cause serious surface ablation. A tight focus results in a small volume deposition of laser energy. Temporal shaping of a femtosecond laser pulse has been reported to elongate the energy deposition volume [24]. Nondiffractive Bessel ultrafast laser was demonstrated to successfully induce high-aspect-ratio uniform modifications with void structures [25]. However, pulse shaping and Bessel generation make the processing rather complicated. Combining a femtosecond laser with a gated continuous wave laser has achieved a high-speed internal modification, but the modification has a large melting region with a droplet shape [26]. In recent years, the double-pulse (DP) regime of femtosecond lasers has been demonstrated to be highly efficient for extending the filament length and enhancing the ionization intensity. Thus, it may be employed as a potential method for internal modification. For example, the utilization of a co-propagating dressing laser pulse can considerably increase the geometric length and longevity of a plasma filament induced by a femtosecond laser pulse in air, which is attributed to the continuous supply of energy for filament propagation [27]. Further, the total energy deposition can be improved by splitting the single femtosecond laser pulse into two sub-pulses with an appropriate separation time based on the Michelson interferometer configuration [28]. However, these studies on DP filaments have been conducted either in air or confined to the excitation level below the threshold of internal modification. In addition, it has been reported that DP Bessel beams improved the efficiency of nanohole drilling in dielectrics [29], and DP Gaussian beams made better holograms in fused silica [30]. However, the mechanism of DP induced filaments and generated internal modifications including the ultrafast interaction of laser-matter and plasma filament-laser is yet to be quantitatively investigated. In this study, we achieved the high-efficiency internal modification in silica using plasma filaments induced by a DP femtosecond Gaussian laser. The mechanism was revealed through the observation of ultrafast dynamics of plasma filaments and the simulation of laser propagations and electron excitations. The pump–probe technique was used to capture the images of time-resolved plasma filaments. Further, the transient absorbance was calculated for the excitation analysis in both the time and space domains. We found that the excitation induced by the first pulse (P1) exerted a temporal effect on the propagation and excitation of the second pulse (P2), thereby resulting in different electron excitations, which further renders different microprocessing efficiencies. Furthermore, the spatial distribution of electron densities at the cross section was estimated to provide deeper insights into the analysis of microprocessing. 2. Method The schematic of experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1(a) (Details are in Section 1 of Supplement 1). A Yb:KGW femtosecond laser (Light Conversion, Pharos) generated 500 fs pulses with a central wavelength of 1030 nm. The laser pulse was split into pump and probe pulses using a polarizing beam splitter (PBS). The pump pulse was further divided into two sub-pulses with equal energy using another PBS, and an optical delay line was used to control the inter-pulse delay (IPD) between the two sub-pulses (first pulse P1 and second pulse P2). P1 and P2 were focused approximately 145 µm (without considering nonlinear effects) into the silica sample via a microscope objective (MO) (Mitutoyo, M Plan Apo NIR 10×) after being circularly polarized by a quarter waveplate. The probe pulse was first frequency-doubled using a beta barium borate (BBO) and then passed through the silica glass sample (AGC, AQ) perpendicularly with pump pulses. The sample was mounted on a 3-axis moving stage. The pump-probe delay (PPD) was also controlled by an optical delay line. The captured phenomena were magnified via an imaging microscope objective (IMO) (Mitutoyo, M Plan Apo NIR 20×) and recorded onto a cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) (Bitran, BU-55LN) which was synchronized with the laser system using a digital delay generator ((Stanford Research Systems, DG645). Further, in the probe path,

[PAGE 3] Research Article Vol. 32, No. 18 / 26 Aug 2024 / Optics Express 32410 a short pass filter (SPF) was used to clean the remaining 1030 nm laser beyond the BBO, and a band pass filter (BPF) before the CCD was used to eliminate the scattered pump light and plasma emissions. In the experiment, both P1 and P2 had an energy of 10 µJ and a beam radius of 9 µm on the sample surface, corresponding to a laser fluence of 3.93 J/cm2. As shown in Fig. 1(b), time-resolved shadowgraphs representing electron dynamics were captured by stepping the PPD. The processing results under the irradiation of P1 and P2 were further characterized using an optical microscope, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). Pump pulses Probe pulse IPD M IMO MO S BPF TL CCD P2 P1 Z X Y (a) Plasma dynamics IPD1 IPD2 IPD3 PPD1 PPD2 PPD3 Processing results (c) (b) Fig. 1. Experimental method. (a) Schematic of experimental setup. MO: microscope objective; IMO: imaging microscope objective; BPF: band pass filter; TL: tube lens; M: mirror; S: silica sample; CCD: cooled charge-coupled device. (b) Illustration of time-resolved plasma filaments obtained by pump-probe shadowgraphy, where PPDs represent pump-probe delays. (c) Illustration of microscope images of processing results using DP with different IPDs. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Internal microprocessing results A shot of DP femtosecond lasers (P1 and P2) with an adjustable IPD was delivered into the silica sample. The processing results under different IPDs were characterized using the optical microscope, as shown in Fig. 2 (complete results are presented in Section 5 of Supplement 1). The propagation direction of the pump pulse is defined as the Z-axis, and the dotted line, representing the interface between air and silica glass, is defined as Z = 0 µm. No permanent internal modification was observed when using one shot of a single pulse (SP) with an energy of 20 µJ (IPD was 0 ps) because the pulse front induced high-density plasma on the sample surface, resulting in a serious reflection and surface ablation. Modifications were observed when DP (each with a pulse energy of 10 µJ) with an IPD of 1 ps was used. Further, the modification zone extended with the increase of IPD from 1–1000 ps. The void modification indicates that super-hot regions were formed after absorbing the laser energy through ionizations [31]. The solid silica transitioned to liquid phase at the high temperature, and the slow liquid cavitation process resulted in void formation [32,33]. Moreover, no modification was observed while using an IPD of several tens of seconds, when the excitation by P1 has fully relaxed before P2 arrives (defined as infinite IPD), because the deposited energy from P1 had diffused completely before P2 was delivered, and one of the DP is insufficient to achieve the internal processing. Therefore, it is evident that decreasing the peak intensity of a femtosecond laser pulse by splitting one pulse into two sub-pulses with an appropriate IPD can improve the efficiency of internal microprocessing, and the IPD is an important factor to control the length of modifications, although it has been widely believed that a higher peak intensity can generate more laser absorptions through nonlinear effects.

[PAGE 4] Research Article Vol. 32, No. 18 / 26 Aug 2024 / Optics Express 32411 0 50 100 150 200 Position Z (μm) Air Silica 20 μm (a) DP (IPD: ꝏ) SP (20 μJ) DP (IPD:1 ps) DP (IPD:10 ps) DP (IPD: 100 ps) DP (IPD:1000 ps) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) Fig. 2. Microscope images of processing results by using one shot of a SP with a pulse energy of 20 µJ and a pair of DP with different IPDs (from 1 ps to infinite) (each with a pulse energy of 10 µJ). Infinite IPD indicates that the excitation of P1 has fully relaxed before P2 arrives. The red arrow indicates the internal modification when IPD is 1 ps. 3.2. Plasma filament dynamics in experiments To reveal the mechanism of DP microprocessing, the transient phenomena occurring during the interaction of pump pulses (P1 and P2) and silica glass were captured using pump-probe shadowgraphy as shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b). The position of the sample mounted on a 3-axis moving stage was changed along the Y-axis in each experiment to ensure a fresh irradiation region. The results are shown in Figs. 3(a)–3(e), where the pump propagation direction is defined as Z-axis, and the dotted line, representing the interface between air and silica glass, is defined as Z = 0 µm (complete results are presented in Section 6 of Supplement 1). Ideally, the center of the plasma filament is at Z-axis. Figure 3(a) presents the dynamics of the plasma filament under the irradiation of only P1, where P2 was blocked. The transition of filaments from “dark” to “bright” was observed with an increase of the P1-probe delay (P1PD) from 1 to 1000 ps, which was attributed to the relaxation of excited free electrons. “Dark” indicates that the free electrons exist and the probe pulse was absorbed, and “bright” was probably caused by the change of the refractive index [34,35] or stimulated emissions [36,37]. The filament region was excited to become “dark” again by P2 with IPD values of 1, 10, 100, and 1000 ps, as shown in Figs. 3(b)–3(e). The excitation region and filament shape are different among irradiations of P2 with various IPD. Compared with P1, the filament extended towards the sample surface when P2 was delivered with an IPD of 1 ps. In addition, the starting region of the filament was almost on the sample surface. With the increase of IPD, the starting region shifted to a deeper position. Moreover, the excitation degree was quantified using the probe absorbance A = −ln(T), where T is the transmissivity of probe, calculated using the ratio of filament images to background images [15,17]. The absorbance corresponding to the center of filament images is shown in Figs. 3(f)–3(j), where a higher absorbance implied stronger electron excitation (complete results are presented in Fig. S9 of Supplement 1). The excitation primarily occurred in the range of Z = 40–180 µm when using P1. As the increase of P1PD, the gradual decrease of the absorbance indicated the decay of excited electrons. However, when P1PD increased to 10 ps, the absorbance near the region of Z = 90 µm was still large, implying a very slow decay speed of electrons. The absorbance decay at the position around Z = 90 µm (Fig. S2 of Supplement 1) was best fitted using a double-exponential curve, having decay time constants of 0.52 ps and 27 ps, which were larger than the decay time of 50–220 fs in many previous studies [18]. This was because the

[PAGE 5] Research Article Vol. 32, No. 18 / 26 Aug 2024 / Optics Express 32412 Fig. 3. Experimental investigation of plasma filament evolution. (a) Evolution of plasma filament induced by P1 with 10 µJ pulse energy, where I, II, III, and IV represent a P1-probe delay (P1PD) of 1, 10, 100, and 1000 ps, respectively. (b)–(e) Filament evolutions at DP mode with an IPD of 1, 10, 100, and 1000 ps, respectively, where I, II, III and IV represent a P2-probe delay (P2PD) of 0, 0.5, 1, and 2 ps, respectively. (f)–(j) Absorbances extracted from the filament in (a)–(e), respectively.

[PAGE 6] Research Article Vol. 32, No. 18 / 26 Aug 2024 / Optics Express 32413 electron density in this experiment was relatively high and the lattice got very hot during the energy transfer from electrons, so that the relaxation time increased to as long as the reported 30 ps [38]. When P2 was delivered with an IPD of 1 ps, the new excitation by P2 primarily appeared in the range of Z = 10–70 µm, and it was relatively weak in the regions of Z = 70–100 µm and Z = 120–170 µm. For an IPD of 10 ps, the electrons were considerably re-excited in the region of Z = 25–190 µm. Finally, for IPD values of 100 and 1000 ps, re-excitation was induced in the regions of Z = 30–190 µm and Z = 40–190 µm, respectively. The change of filament evolutions indicates a temporary effect of P1 on the propagation and excitation of P2. After the irradiation of P1, no excitation was observed in the shallow region (Z < 40 µm). However, in the same region, electron excitation by P2 was clearly observed, which gradually decreased with the increase of IPD. This phenomenon can be attributed to the unobservable but existing low-density plasma induced by P1 in the shallow region, which worked as seed electrons and absorbed P2 significantly through inverse bremsstrahlung (IB) absorption [39]. With the increase in IPD, seed electrons induced by P1 became self-trapped excitons (STEs) [18,40] owing to the intensive interaction between free electrons and the lattice. STEs have a bandgap of 5.6 eV [18] to the conduction band thus resulting in a decrease of P2 excitations in the shallow area. Subsequently, STEs decayed in a nonradiative manner to form the defect of E’ centers and non-bridging oxygen hole centers (NBOHCs), or even oxygen deficiency centers if the excitation was very strong [41,42], which further decreased the P2 excitation. Therefore, as the increase of IPD, the absorption of P2 gradually decreased in the shallow region, and more energy of P2 was delivered to interact with the residual seed electron in the deeper region. In addition, the filament diameter showed a similar variation tendency with filament propagation. The diameter increased in the region of Z < 100 µm when P2 reached the P1 excitation area with an IPD of 1 ps. Thereafter, it gradually decreased with further increase in the IPD, and finally became nearly identical to that in P1. This phenomenon can also be caused by the low-density plasma distributed on the edge area of the filament induced by P1. 3.3. Simulation of plasma filament formation To further study the mechanism of DP filament formation, a numerical model was built to simulate the influence of electrons induced by P1 on the propagation of P2. The model was based on the extended nonlinear Schrödinger equation (NLSE) [43–45] coupled with the modified ionization rate equation [46,47] (further details are presented in Section 2 and Section 3 of Supplement 1). As the femtosecond laser pulse propagated in silica glass, it experienced diffraction, dispersion, Kerr effect focusing, material ionization, plasma defocusing, and plasma absorption. Consequently, free electrons were excited by the laser pulse through photon and cascade ionizations, and then trapped into the self-trapped state with a gap of 5.6 eV [18] to the conduction band. Subsequently, the self-trapped excitons (STEs) gradually relaxed to form the defect. During the relaxation, the energy was transferred from excited electrons to the lattice resulting in a temperature increase. Because the permanent modification was not observed after the irradiation of P1, the possible thermal effect induced by P1 on the propagation and excitation of P2 was not considered. After the irradiation of P1, there were three types of electrons in the filament area, namely, free electrons, STEs, and valence electrons, and their density changed with time. Therefore, when the second pulse passed through the region excited by P1, it interacted with these electrons. Different IPD corresponded to different initial conditions of electrons for P2 excitation, which further influenced P2 propagation. The refractive index in the filament region was related to the electron density based on Drude model [48], which had effects on the propagation and excitation of P2. The influence of STEs, defects, and temperature on refractive index change was not included in this calculation for a simplification of the quite complicated physical process.