[PAGE 1] OPEN REVIEW Ultrafast laser processing of materials: from science to industry Mangirdas Malinauskas1, Albertas Žukauskas1, Satoshi Hasegawa2, Yoshio Hayasaki2, Vygantas Mizeikis3, Ričardas Buividas4 and Saulius Juodkazis4,5,6 Processing of materials by ultrashort laser pulses has evolved signiﬁcantly over the last decade and is starting to reveal its scientiﬁc, technological and industrial potential. In ultrafast laser manufacturing, optical energy of tightly focused femtosecond or picosecond laser pulses can be delivered to precisely deﬁned positions in the bulk of materials via two-/multi-photon excita- tion on a timescale much faster than thermal energy exchange between photoexcited electrons and lattice ions. Control of photo- ionization and thermal processes with the highest precision, inducing local photomodiﬁcation in sub-100-nm-sized regions has been achieved. State-of-the-art ultrashort laser processing techniques exploit high 0.1–1 μm spatial resolution and almost unrest- ricted three-dimensional structuring capability. Adjustable pulse duration, spatiotemporal chirp, phase front tilt and polarization allow control of photomodiﬁcation via uniquely wide parameter space. Mature opto-electrical/mechanical technologies have enabled laser processing speeds approaching meters-per-second, leading to a fast lab-to-fab transfer. The key aspects and latest achievements are reviewed with an emphasis on the fundamental relation between spatial resolution and total fabrication throughput. Emerging biomedical applications implementing micrometer feature precision over centimeter-scale scaffolds and photonic wire bonding in telecommunications are highlighted. Light: Science & Applications (2016) 5, e16133; doi:10.1038/lsa.2016.133; published online 12 August 2016 Keywords: biomedical applications; direct laser writing; functional microdevices; material processing; nonlinear light–matter interaction; 3D structuring; ultrashort laser pulses UNIQUENESS OF ULTRAFAST LASER PROCESSING The possibility of three-dimensional (3D) writing in glass1 and polymers2 using tightly focused femtosecond (fs) laser pulses, demon- strated roughly two decades ago, has attracted attention in a wide range of areas related to academic research and engineering. The fabrication of 3D objects with a size comparable to that of a living cell and comprising even ﬁner details3 suggests a realization of remotely controllable 3D micro-bots to perform in vivo healing missions or the creation of all-optical information processors integrated on a single 3D microchip and robust non-erasable optical memory structures. Thus began the race towards these and many other attractive goals. At present, most of those goals have yet to be reached; however, the progress achieved in some areas is signiﬁcant. Currently, optical memories with data density exceeding ∼1 Tbit cm–3 (Refs. 4,5), wave- guide-based optical information processing structures1, elements of optical quantum computing systems6,7, 3D photonic crystals (PhC)8 and micro-mechanical/biological systems9,10 are obtainable using ultrashort laser pulses. Here, we discuss these achievements and outline current trends in the development of laser processing and its applications, which are bound to make ultrashort laser fabrication an indispensable tool for future nanotechnologies. Unrestricted freeform manufacturing in 3D-space on the mesoscale spanning the critical dimensions of 10 nm to 100 μm in feature sizes has been an engineering curiosity over the last 10–15 years. Endless incarnations of micro-copies from real-world items were fabricated in a variety of photo-polymers, recorded in glasses and crystals. This endeavor pushed and explored the limits of novel 3D fabrication and experimented with optimization for a higher throughput and resolution11. The efforts continue to this day and challenge well- established benchmarks in resolution, feature size, precision and efﬁciency developed over more than 50 years in the microelectronics industry. Comparison of 3D emerging technology with a mature two- dimensional (2D) micro-technology is only partially fair owing to a qualitative difference in the 3D character and the capability of laser manufacturing. Both approaches have fundamental limitations set by the wavelength of fabrication for electrons and photons, respectively. The difference in the relevant wavelengths is revealing: the electron’s de Broglie wavelength at a typical V = 50 kV acceleration voltage in 1Laser Research Centre, Department of Quantum Electronics, Physics Faculty, Vilnius University, Saulėtekio Ave. 10, LT-10223 Vilnius, Lithuania; 2Center for Optical Research and Education (CORE), Utsunomiya University, 7-1-2 Yoto, Utsunomiya 321-8585, Japan; 3Research Institute of Electronics, Shizuoka University, 3-5-3-1 Johoku, Naka-ku, Hamamatsu 432-8561, Japan; 4Centre for Micro-Photonics, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Technology, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, VIC 3122, Australia; 5Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, ANFF, 151 Wellington Road, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia and 6Center of Nanotechnology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia Correspondence: M Malinauskas, Email: mangirdas.malinauskas@ff.vu.lt; S Juodkazis, Email: sjuodkazis@swin.edu.au Received 7 January 2015; revised 4 March 2016; accepted 9 March 2016; accepted article preview online 14 March 2016 Light: Science & Applications (2016) 5, e16133; doi:10.1038/lsa.2016.133 & 2016 CIOMP. All rights reserved 2047-7538/16 www.nature.com/lsa

[PAGE 2] electron beam lithography is le ¼ h mv ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ h2 2emV q C0:055 Å (nonrelati- vistic), where h, e, m are the Plank’s constant, electron charge and mass, respectively, whereas the light wavelength λl = 5000 Å (a green color) in 3D-laser writing. Lasers entered and now dominate the ﬁelds of welding, drilling, cladding and manufacturing with a unique capability of 3D robotic light delivery at a 0.1–10 m scale and pointing stability of ∼1 mm (for example, in the car manufacturing industry) since circa 1980 (Ref. 12). Lasers operating at 1 or 10 μm wavelengths and at long pulse or continuous-wave (cw) mode are practical and useful, yet unsuitable for fabrication tasks at scales smaller than 1 mm. Thus, they are presently challenged in precision and resolution by reliable ultrashort pulsed lasers. A double innovation in (i) the development of new materials and (ii) laser sources that are better suited for 3D micro- printing was required for the continued progress of laser fabrication and the long-praised resolution of fabrication not being the driving factor. Now, with the emergence of a new generation of reliable fs-lasers, a set of new materials and backing by science of light–matter interaction at the nanoscale with cross-sections smaller than 100 nm, miniatur- ization of 3D-laser fabrication is advancing and innovating. To demonstrate the versatility and potential of the new technology, 3D inscription, additive manufacturing and surface texturation techniques are shown to reach the high throughput required for industry. A selected few representative examples illustrate the capabilities and truly unique features of fs-laser fabrication. IS FABRICATION USING ULTRAFAST LASERS A FUTURE TECHNOLOGY? Industrial challenges Manufacturing has its own conservative pace of development and justiﬁcation of new investments. Considerable innovation that brings a new quality to the product simultaneously with higher productivity is always required for the next cycle of technological renovation, which occurs on a 7–10-year-modernization cycle on a factory ﬂoor. In manufacturing with lasers, their acquisition and maintenance costs, reliability and longevity were always the main driving forces for industrial installations. The innovation that an ultrashort pulsed laser can bring to manufacturing is discussed next from the perspective of unique control over the light–matter interaction when ultrashort laser pulses are used and in view of the practical requirements of high productivity. The additive manufacturing, cutting and welding with CO2, YAG and ﬁber lasers that operate at 10 or 1 μm wavelengths with a cw or pulsed-mode operation are already powering the automotive, con- struction and marking industries12. The feed speeds of a workpiece are ∼10 cm min–1 (∼1 mm s–1 or in speciﬁc cases even higher) for marking and welding applications realized with lasers with an average power of ∼0.1–1 kW. The target industrial macro-fabrication speed is ∼10 cm min–1 for a linear scan, including turning points, which can already be demonstrated in fs-laser micro-fabrication13,14 with a recent record in waveguide writing speed of 200 mm s–1 (Ref. 15) on the screen of a mobile phone inside Gorilla glass. Another efﬁcient and conﬁned light delivery is a ﬁlament16 self-formed in water, which can assist in uniform energy delivery along the beam propagation direction17. This helps laser fabrication of curved surfaces where tight focusing would require axial position adjustments for precise match- ing of the focal region and the sample’s surface18. The principle of this approach is depicted in Figure 1. The formed ﬁlament can have a high aspect ratio (length to width) and experimentally realized more than 2 mm in length and just tens of micrometers in diameter13. When a laser raster scan or multi-line exposure mode is used for a ﬁll exposure of 3D volume of a workpiece/pattern, the fabrication time quickly increases to hours for an object with 3D cross-sections of ∼1 in. The fastest available beam scan approach employs mechanical galvo-scanners that can deﬂect the beam even faster than 10 m s–1. However, such high-speed scanning is achievable only for linear structures. When turning tight corners, acceleration becomes a serious issue. The acousto-optical device-based deﬂector enables increased beam scanning velocities up to 2 m s–1 with no inherent limitations on a turn radius maintaining high positioning repeatability19. In addition, powerful laser sources can be used for parallel multibeam20 fabrication as well as employing passive21 or active beam shaping techniques22. Such implementations dramatically increase fabrication throughput. Recently, tomographic data were used as a master CAD model for laser 3D fabrication23, an approach adopted from 3D printing. Fs-laser fabrication have application where high precision is required, where structuring of the surface and bulk of transparent materials that are brittle and hard must be performed. If composite and layered materials must be structured in a complicated 3D fashion, it can be performed by fs-laser structuring. This has been understood from the basics of light–matter interaction in which pulses shorter than the energy relaxation between electrons and lattice ions can deliver energy with the highest precision and without plasma screen- ing/reﬂection effects24–26. Scaling from 2D to 3D Because high precision and small feature size are incompatible with large-throughput fabrication—Tennant’s law27—and by following the universal trend of miniaturization, we expect future applications for fs- laser manufactured structures and objects to be used in smaller- footprint lab-on-a-chip applications. Lab-on-a-chip devices have typical dimensions of 1 × 1 cm2 and feature sizes of the functional elements such as channels and optical elements on the order of a cross-section of an optical ﬁber (a human hair) of ∼100 μm. At this already challenging scale, the surface ﬁnishing and smallest structures should be controlled at λ/20 nm precision/resolution for optical functionality. Fs-laser sources at 50–1000 kHz repetition rates and average power up to 10 W for a typical wavelength λ≃1 μm and pulse duration τp≃200 fs have reached an industrial grade in terms of reliability and capability of fabrication at the required ∼10 cm min–1 workpiece feed rates. Tennant’s law linking the resolution, R (nm) and the Focus Filament Focus Water a b Figure 1 Beam focusing approaches: (a) a beam is focused on the surface or volume of a material; (b) an fs-beam is focused on liquid and forms a light ﬁlament suitable for processing of transparent and opaque workpieces at different axial locations or curvature of the surface. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 13. JLPS. All rights reserved. Ultrafast laser processing of materials M Malinauskas et al 2 Light: Science & Applications doi:10.1038/lsa.2016.133

[PAGE 3] throughput, T2D (μm2 h–1) of fabrication via a planar lithography predicts the following scaling27: T2D ¼ R=2:3 ð Þ5 or Resolution ¼ 2:3 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ Throughput 5p ð1Þ Following the arguments of scaling, for a 3D fabrication via lithographic approach, one could expect T3D ¼ R=2:3 ð Þ5 ´ 2=3 or R ¼ 2:3T0:3 3D   with T3D (μm3 h–1), which follows from area-to- volume scaling. However, Tennant’s law is for the 2D fabrication; for the production of 3D objects, we use a more general expression R ¼ C ´ T0:3 3D, where value of C = 32.2 is taken to pin the power plot (Figure 2) to the natural throughput of protein production in a 3D conformation by a ribosome; the resolution (often referred to but not to be mixed up with the individual feature size) is taken as 1 nm. This C value corresponds to the production rate of 20 amino acids per second in a cell30. It is noteworthy that this comparison of direct writing used in fabrication—for example, building 3D objects by laser polymerization28 or glass structuring29—is valid because ribosome is also constructing 3D proteins from a linear code30. Another measure of the 3D production rate can be made from the growth rate of cells. Human nails grow at a 1 nm s–1 linear speed, which means 3.6 μm3 h–1, and is similar to the protein production rate. Figure 2 shows typical Resolution ∝Throughput regions marked by ovals for the manipulation of single atoms by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), writing by oxidation of SiO2 with an atomic force microscope (AFM) needle, standard electron beam (EBL) and optical mask projection lithographies. These are 2D technologies that obey Tennant’s scaling T2D = (R/2.3)5, which is a pure empirical depen- dence. Interestingly, starting from the current 22-nm node of modern complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) lithography, the ﬁeld transistor design allows the exertion of 3D control of the depletion regions in the channel. Hence, the future of planar 2D technology tends to become 3D functional as the feature size is reduced31. Apparently, for the 3D case (Figure 2), direct laser writing by polymerization28 and volume Bragg gratings formed by axially extended Bessel–Gauss fs-beam14 delivers a 3D ﬁnished and functional structure. For example, direct laser writing with fs-laser pulses delivers 3D fabrication of ∼103 μm3 s–1 with focal spot size d = 1.22λ/NA≃λ for 3D structuring of silicone elastomer28,32; here, NA is the numerical aperture of the objective lens. On the Resolution ∝Throughput plot (Figure 2), the corresponding 3D fabrication examples tend to cluster towards the desirable lower-right side of the lines representing Tennant’s law for the 3D case. This shows that for 3D-laser fabrication, the throughput can meet industrial standard at the required resolution for 3D manufacturing. ULTRAFAST LASER LITHOGRAPHY The trend of miniaturization, which began in CMOS electronics, is currently spreading to other areas, such as micro-optics, micro-ﬂuidics and micro-mechanics. In these ﬁelds, new functionalities of micro- and nanostructures stem from physical or chemical responses arising because of size and shape-related effects and, in the case of optical systems, beneﬁt from enhanced interactions between light and matter in artiﬁcially structured media. Perhaps the most intuitively appealing examples of such applications are optically controlled mechanical phenomena—for example, laser trapping—which rely on opto- mechanical susceptibility of microscopic particles and structures to optically generated minute forces and torques. Other rapidly evolving areas are optics of plasmonic nanoparticles and PhCs, which enable control over light emission, absorption and propagation at the nanoscale, a demand strongly stimulated by the need for green and sustainable use of energy and materials. Below, we will mainly focus on the structuring of dielectrics and their new optical, mechanical and biomedical functionalities. Requirements for surface quality Micro- and nanofabrication of optical structures requires surface roughness oλ/20, (≃20−40 nm for visible wavelengths) to reduce random light scattering. Although this requirement can be in some cases alleviated by post-fabrication treatment—for example, controlled remelting, lapping and polishing of microscale objects—it still remains a difﬁcult task. Therefore, the fabrication techniques capable of directly delivering the required quality are essentially preferred. In this respect, the potential of fs-laser lithography has been demon- strated many times, and some examples will be given in the sections below. In general, the surface quality of laser-fabricated optical elements is high enough to enable their direct use in photonic applications. Materials and processing techniques Owing to the requirements of high surface quality and low random scattering, laser fabrication of optical micro- and nanostructures prefers nondestructive photomodiﬁcation processes over optical breakdown or other destructive processes. Therefore, liquid photo- curable organic resins and negative-tone photoresists are mainly used as initial materials for direct laser writing (DLW) lithography. In these materials, optical absorption induces photochemical reactions, such as photopolymerization (curing). In liquid resins, this process leads to liquid-to-solid transition, whereas in photoresists—which in most cases are exposed as dry, solidiﬁed ﬁlms—photomodiﬁcation has a latent character. After the laser structuring, unexposed liquid resin is rinsed away, whereas unexposed resist is dissolved in a developer and removed from the structure. Finally, the rinse liquid is dried; this is a critical step for ﬁnely patterned, fragile structures, because they may become completely destroyed by powerful capillary forces. These undesired effects can be suppressed by the use of freeze-drying or critical-point drying techniques to eliminate the surface tension effects33,34. 104 103 102 101 100 10–1 10–6 10–4 10–2 100 102 104 106 108 1010 Throughput, T (μm2 h–1 for 2D; μm3 h–1 for 3D) Resolution, R (nm) Nanotechnology Low resolution Low productivity Ribosome STM 2D 3D Polymerization ref.[21] Glass Ripples [22] [10] Optical EBL AFM High resolution High productivity 22 nm node DLW 2015 light Figure 2 Tennant’s scaling: state-of-the-art of nanotechnology in 2003 for the resolution vs. throughput R = 2.35 T2D (Ref. 27). Direct 3D laser writing for polymerization28 with T ≃109 μm3 h–1, Bragg grating recording by Bessel–Gauss fs-beam in glass14, surface ripple formation on crystals/ glasses29 are marked along with the Tennant’s law predictions rescaled for the 3D C × 106 μm3 h–1 with C = 32.2 taken from the speed of protein production in ribosome30 (see text for details). The size of elliptical markers is representative of the resolution span; the current 22 nm node of modern CMOS lithography is marked by an arrow. Ultrafast laser processing of materials M Malinauskas et al 3 Light: Science & Applications doi:10.1038/lsa.2016.133

[PAGE 4] Historically, liquid resins were the ﬁrst materials to show potential for 3D-laser structuring2,35–37, but later negative-tone photoresists became widely used owing to their higher stability during processing and lower post-drying shrinkage. Among photoresists, epoxy- based chemically ampliﬁed photoresist SU-8 has acquired wide popularity8,38–40, because this resist, speciﬁcally intended for micro- fabrication of mechanical components via ultraviolet lithography, was already commercially available during the early steps of development of 3D-laser lithography. SU-8 is optically transparent in visible and infrared (IR) spectral ranges, but can be exposed via two-photon and multi-photon absorption, ensures submicron resolution, has a refractive index ≈1.5, and is mechanically strong and biocompatible. Numerous demonstrations of micro- and nano-photonic structures— for example, 3D PhCs—fabricated in SU-8 can be found in the literature41,42. Subsequently, new classes of photoresists speciﬁc for laser litho- graphy were developed, aiming to further improve spatial resolution, simplify post-processing and reduce drying-related shrinkage. A class of photoresists based on a zirconium propoxide sol–gel43 developed by a collaboration of several groups offers signiﬁcantly improved spatial resolution, low proximity effect (thin threads that evolve randomly and uncontrollably between closely spaced larger features) and low shrinkage44. This is achieved by combining organic and inorganic components and various modiﬁcations of this hybrid material, also known as SZ2080, which were synthesized to target speciﬁc purposes —for example, assisting subsequent metallization by the inclusion of metal-binding moieties45 and the improvement of spatial resolution by inclusion of mobile quenching molecules46. Tuning proportions of photoresist components, such as glass-forming silica, zirconia, titania and methylmetacrylate plastic-like moieties allow a ﬂexible choice of mechanical and optical properties of micro-optical elements47,48. In addition to SZ2080, a line of IP resists developed by and available commercially from Nanoscribe GmbH49 offers similar advantages for ultrafast laser structuring. IP photoresists also include liquid photo- resists, which can simultaneously act as an index-matching liquid during the DLW process and has enabled the achievement of structures with extremely large heights50. Because swelling and shrinkage during development and drying is inherent to negative-tone photoresists33,51–53, shrinkage effects can be signiﬁcantly suppressed by using positive-tone resists borrowed from the semiconductor industry54,55; however, in this case, the total exposed (to be removed) volume may increase, and the fabrication time may lengthen some- what in the case of sequential DLW processes. Photosensitivity of photoresists and resins was conventionally tailored by adding photoinitiators to these materials. Recently, careful control over spectral and temporal characteristics of fs-laser pulses has enabled precise control over photo-excitation via multi-photon and avalanche ionization as well as by controlling the thermal conditions at the focal volume inside a pure resist. A combination of high pre-breakdown irradiance and fast scanning opens the possibility to tame chemical- free radical creation and their thermal cross-linking without the necessity of a photoinitiator11,56. Coincidentally, initiator-free cross- linking in silicone28 has produced biocompatible material free of the bio-toxic cyclic compounds present in most photoinitiators. Strongly 3D-localized thermal curing of resists57,58 can now be widely explored for microfabrication owing to their fast scan capabilities. With regard to fabrication techniques, the two main methods are holographic fabrication20–22 and DLW59–64. Holographic fabrication exploits nondestructive exposure of a material to a periodic inter- ference ﬁeld of several coherent laser pulses, and can be implemented using a simple opto-mechanical setup and a wide variety of ampliﬁed and unampliﬁed laser sources. Various implementations of DLW are described in the available literature11,65–67, and DLW setups are commercially available from several companies49,68–70. Among the current developments in the practical implementation of the DLW technique is a signiﬁcant increase of the laser beam scan speed in the sample from ∼100 μm s–1 toward meters-per-second achieved via the combined use of fast mechanics for sample translation and scanning of the beam focus inside the sample9,71,72. Special exposure schemes tailored to improve the axial resolution of DLW can also be added73–75. For exposure of photoresist or resin samples, fs-laser oscillators (for example, Ti:sapphire or ﬁber laser systems) provide sufﬁcient exposure levels. The wide availability and constantly decreasing size and price of these laser sources contribute to the practical applicability of the DLW technique. For exploitation of the DLW technique near or above the laser-induced breakdown threshold in solid crystals or glasses (for example, for waveguide writing and creation of new materials), ampliﬁed laser systems providing pulse energies 41 μJ are required. Next to lithography, the fs-laser irradiation can be very similarly applied for processing of fused silica (the amorphous form of SiO2) and introduces a novel technology platform for highly integrated all- optical microsystems. In contrast with common approaches that rely on combining materials to achieve particular functions, fs-laser- fabricated microsystems rely on single material monolith, whose properties are locally and 3D functionalized by selective exposure. The combination of functionalized zones with different physical properties allows integration of systems without the need for further assembly of packaging steps or without the need for multiple processing steps, like for instance sequences of layers deposition, exposure and etching steps (Figure 3; Ref. 76). Lastly, there is numerous other additive (and subtractive) manufacturing approaches where ultrashort pulses have signiﬁcant advantages over longer pulses. To mention a few techniques like laser-induced forward transfer (LIFT) or an intense ﬁeld-induced self assembly are not reviewed here; see Refs. 77, 78 for the detailed account. 3D micro-optical elements Aspherical and axicon micro-lenses as well as diffractive optical elements were DLW fabricated directly on the core of the optical ﬁber79–81, illustrating the potential of the technique to integrate various components. Figure 4 shows an example of such optical elements fabricated in photoresist SZ2080. Spiral waveplates59,82 for optical vortex generation (Figure 5) and hybrid refractive-diffractive elements blending diffraction gratings and lenses can be made83. 400 μm Figure 3 A cross-pivot hinge out of fused silica as a part of a mechanical structure. The images show the three crossed beams and the rounded corners at the location where the beams are connected to the main body. Note the high aspect ratio of the micromachining process. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 76. MDPI. All rights reserved. Ultrafast laser processing of materials M Malinauskas et al 4 Light: Science & Applications doi:10.1038/lsa.2016.133

[PAGE 5] A rapidly growing ﬁeld of singular optics exploring the generation and control of optical vortices at a microscale beneﬁts from DLW via polymerization owing to a simple method to achieve ∼100% efﬁciency of the optical vortex generation. Alternatively, planar patterns for the vortex generation—q-plates—are made of azimuthally patterned form birefringence inside glass by fs-laser structuring84,85; however, they suffer from scattering losses. It is helpful to stress here that these structures clearly satisfy the high surface quality requirements outlined in the section above and are directly usable. It has been already proved by several studies that there is no shape limitation or restriction of a single element in an array of micro-lenses86–88. Obviously, surface quality and optical characteristics of these elements can be retained during their replication—for example by nanoimprint, hot embossing and molding—directly or via an Ni-shim replication89,90. Recently, integration of 2D and 3D optical components comprising both passive and active functionalities —namely, a rectangular waveguide of rectangular cross-section that can be π/2-twisted to form an arch on the substrate—was demonstrated91. Thus, the application of ultrashort laser processing can lead to realization of new optical integrated devices with novel functionalities such as optoﬂuidic single-cell counters10. Interestingly, by applying different exposure doses, one can achieve 3D or 2D varying material properties, thus producing monolithic components with composite properties92. This seems to be an attractive option for producing custom-made freeform gradient refractive index micro- optical elements93. One of the primary application areas of ultrafast laser lithography in photoresists and resins has been the fabrication of PhC structures94–101, especially 3D ones that are difﬁcult or impossible to realize by other available techniques. 3D PhCs with woodpile41,102, spiral103,104, slanted-pore105 and other architectures64,106 with high optical quality were demonstrated during the last decade. Figure 6 summarizes the structural and optical properties of a 3D woodpile architecture PhC fabricated in SZ2080 photoresist by DLW and dried in supercritical CO2. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images shown in Figure 6 (a) demonstrate the DLW fabrication of highly resolved features, evident from woodpile rods with lateral thickness of ~ axy = 135 nm. The in-plane lattice period (distance between two neighboring woodpile rods), designed to be 1000 nm, is in reality reduced to 940 nm owing to shrinkage of ~ 5% of the PhC lattice. Shrinkage by a similar amount is also evident in the large-scale SEM image in Figure 6(a). The distance between the neighboring woodpile planes is designed to be az ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ð2Þ p =4axy to maintain a face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice symmetry. PhC structures with similar parameters were unexpectedly found to exhibit strong resonant reﬂection at visible wavelengths, although neither fundamental nor higher-order photonic stopgaps (PSG) are expected to open in this spectral range owing to a fairly large PhC lattice period. Figure 6(b) shows optical image of several fcc woodpile structures similar to that in Figure 6(a), having lattice periods axy varying in small steps and fabricated at different average powers of the writing laser beam. Observation in reﬂection mode within an angular incidence range of ± 17° clearly reveals the structural color of the PhC structures. The color exhibits redshift with increasing lattice period and writing laser power (that is, dielectric ﬁlling ratio) in qualitative agreement with Maxwell’s scaling behavior107, thus indicating that its origin is linked to the periodicity of the PhC. Figure 6(c) summarizes the interpretation of the structural color by comparing the experi- mental reﬂectivity spectrum of the PhC structure in Figure 6(a) with the reﬂectivity spectrum and photonic band diagram simulated using the ﬁnite-difference time-domain technique. As can be seen, a fundamental PSG opens along the observation (woodpile layer stacking) direction near the 1400 nm wavelength in the only PSG and results in a near-IR reﬂectivity band, whereas the visible reﬂectivity band occurring near the 700 nm wavelength spectrally overlaps with nearly horizontal segments of some high-photonic bands characterized by low group velocity. Accordingly, resonant backscattering should be associated with coupling losses between incident plane waves and slow-light modes inside the PhC107. Exploitation of high-photonic band dispersion Lenses: Conical Aspherical Lens Fiber core 50 μm Pillar 50 μm 30 μm Optical fiber Pillar a b c Figure 4 Freeform 3D micro-optical elements fabricated by DLW: hybrid optical elements—aspheric and axicon lenses on a tip of optical ﬁber. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 81. JLPS. All rights reserved. Scan 1 μm 1 μm a b 8 6 4 2 0 5 10 15 20 1 2 3 4 Top view Cross section (μm) Height (μm) 1 2 3 4 c Figure 5 Optical vortex generating spiral waveplates. Smaller (a, b) and larger (c) cross-sections optical vortex generators. (a, b) SEM images of micro-plates made by point-by-point exposure (inset in b shows 3D construction of irradiation matrix). (c) Height scans at four locations of the step edge of the spiral plate; diameter of the plate was 60 μm. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 59. Copyright (2010), AIP Publishing LLC. Ultrafast laser processing of materials M Malinauskas et al 5 Light: Science & Applications doi:10.1038/lsa.2016.133

[PAGE 6] allows realization of PhC-based structural color materials without the need to downscale their lattice period. Slow-light regions are promis- ing for sensors owing to their increased light–matter interaction. Ultimate feature size vs. resolution The latest advances in nonlinear polymerization-based laser structur- ing reveal that it is not the exposure conditions but the reacting material itself that is a real limiting factor for the ultimate resolution108. First, one should clearly distinguish the difference between the feature size and the resolution—in other words, dimen- sions of a single feature and resolved separate features109. Although nonlinear light-matter interaction-induced modiﬁcation volume can be squeezed down to tens of nanometers by reducing the applied laser intensity (the exposure dose), it is not very helpful for ensuring scale- down of the resolution110,111. The fabricated structure is revealed by using wet development; the tiny volumes of cross-linked material tend to shrink and become even smaller. Hence, this minimizes the polymerized feature size but hardly improves the resolution. The stimulated emission depletion (STED) technique, well estab- lished in multi-photon microscopy112, can be implemented to improve both the features size and the resolution, as shown in Figure 7a and 7b. STED-inspired lithography relies on simultaneous photo-induced activation and deactivation of the polymerization process. The ultrafast excitation pulse drives the photoinitiator molecules to a long-lived intermediate state that initiates polymerization on a relatively slow timescale. A second laser is employed to quench this intermediate to the ground state, preventing polymerization. By spatial beam shaping, the photomodiﬁcation can be conﬁned to a well-sub- diffraction-limited small region. This research vector was extensively studied by several research groups; M. Wegener’s and T. Klar’s are among the most active. Their results proved that the feature size can be more conﬁned by optimizing the material for that purpose and applying a dual exposure: an ultrafast excitation and inhibition113. Experimentally realized arrangements including phase masks for speciﬁc beam shaping are already described in detail elsewhere111,114. Most importantly, it was shown that this approach empowers dramatic improvement of not only the lateral but also the axial resolution115. This progress makes the DLW lithography technique even more attractive and versatile for the manufacturing of state-of- the-art photonic as well as biological components116. Despite these achievements, the topic of achievable resolution and feature size remains actively debated with the main arguments focused on the mechanisms of polymerization and its kinetics117–120. 1.5 1.5 1 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 0 0 0 Lattice period Reflectivity Wave vector Normalized frequency Normalized frequency Laser power 10 μm 1 μm c = 1400 nm c = 700 nm Experiment FDTD simulation X′ Γ a b c Figure 6 Coloration via slowing light. (a) SEM image of 3D woodpile architecture PhC in photoresist SZ2080, (b) optical microscopy image of several woodpile structures having different lattice parameters and exhibiting different structural color, (c) comparison between experimental optical reﬂectivity spectrum of the sample shown in a and numerically simulated reﬂectivity spectrum as well as photonic band diagram. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 94. JLPS. All rights reserved. a b d c Depletion power 220 nm x y z 100 nm 65 nm 500 nm 4 μm Wall Figure 7 (a) A typical DLW STED exposure proﬁle: red volume represents standard focusing exciting the material; green represents a phase mask- generated depletion (bottle beam); violet is the resulting modiﬁed volume (excitation is minimized by cutting the side and top-bottom lobes with a shaped depletion beam)73. (b) Using the same excitation conditions but increasing the depletion power, the feature size shrinks (from left to right, it is minimized from 220 nm down to 65 nm)73. (c, d) Magniﬁed and full-scale image of 3D chiral polarizer structure fabricated employing simultaneous combination of dip-in50 and STED techniques111. Reproduced with permission from Refs. 73, 111. OSA. All rights reserved. Ultrafast laser processing of materials M Malinauskas et al 6 Light: Science & Applications doi:10.1038/lsa.2016.133