[PAGE 1] IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2021 1100112 Ultra-Short Pulse Lasers for Microfabrication: A Review Gediminas Raˇciukaitis (Invited Paper) Abstract—Ultra-short pulse lasers, generating coherent light pulses with pulse durations in the picosecond and femtosecond range, are becoming popular in precision laser microfabrication. They are beneﬁting not only from well-predicted laser ablation with the suppressed heat-affected zone but also by opening new processing opportunities, especially in transparent materials, due to enhanced non-linear interaction with the material. In this review, the evolution of various kinds of mode-locked lasers from a scien- tiﬁc toy to a robust industrial tool is reviewed. The utilization ben- eﬁts of high-average-power, high-pulse-repetition-rate ultra-short pulse laser are closely related to beam shaping and manipulation techniques. Fast beam scanning with galvanometric and polygon scanners as well as multi-beam parallel processing methods were developed. Some hot applications areas are brieﬂy described. The efﬁcient use of photons from ultra-short pulse lasers pushed the de- velopment of optimization methods in the ablation process. Efforts toward upscaling the process by increasing the average power of mode-locked lasers made feedback to laser developers, and burst regime became a necessity as well as high-speed beam scanning devices. Unique opportunities of ultra-short pulses are successfully exploitedinmachiningtransparentmaterials,withglassseparation being the leading application. Index Terms—Ultra-short pulse lasers, laser applications, materials processing. I. INTRODUCTION U LTRASHORT pulse lasers generating coherent light pulses with pulse durations in the picosecond and fem- tosecond range are becoming popular in precision laser micro- fabricationbeneﬁtingnotonlyfromwell-predictedlaserablation with the suppressed heat-affected zone but also by opening new processing opportunities, especially in transparent materials due toenhancednon-linearinteractionwiththematerial.Ittookmore than thirty years until ultra-short pulse lasers from a scientiﬁc toy working in a thermally stabilized laboratory evolved into a robust tool for the 24/7 operation at a factory ﬂoor. Increased pulse repetition rate from 1 kHz to tens of MHz and even GHz of industrial-grade lasers pushed progressing in fast beam scanning with galvanometric and polygon scanners. Furthermore, upscaling in pulse energy of the ultra-short pulse Manuscript received April 8, 2021; revised July 9, 2021; accepted July 11, 2021. Date of publication July 14, 2021; date of current version August 25, 2021. The author is with the FTMC - the Center for Physical Sciences and Technol- ogy, Vilnius LT-02300, Lithuania (e-mail: g.raciukaitis@ftmc.lt). Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at https: //doi.org/10.1109/JSTQE.2021.3097009. Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSTQE.2021.3097009 lasers lead to innovations in multi-beam processing methods with the highly parallelized material process with a single laser, including utilization of laser beam interference. Together with the evolution of the picosecond and femtosec- ond lasers, signiﬁcant efforts have been made in laser process development, utilizing unique properties of the coherent light sources with extremely short pulse duration. Some hot applica- tions areas are brieﬂy described. The efﬁcient use of photons from ultra-short pulse lasers pushed the development of optimization methods in the ablation process. Efforts toward upscaling the process by increasing the average power of mode-locked lasers made feedback to laser developers, and burst regime became a necessity as well as high-speed beam scanning devices. Unique opportunities of ultra-short pulses are successfully exploited in machining transparent materials, with glass separation being the leading application. II. ULTRA-SHORT PULSE LASERS Ultra-short pulse (USP) lasers are ones working in a mode- locking regime with pulse duration from tens of picoseconds down to femtoseconds when spontaneously emitted photons are synchronized during their travel inside the laser cavity. There is a variety of methods to generate ultra-short light pulses, but stable pulse trains from diode-pumped solid-state lasers are provided by Kerr-lens, saturable semiconductor absorber mode-locking or in a ﬁber laser. Industrial-grade ultra-short pulse lasers, solid-state or ﬁber- based, consists of a master oscillator, power ampliﬁer and op- tional stretcher/compressor to get sub-picosecond pulses. A. Master Oscillators for USP Lasers The master oscillator is the heart of the USP laser, where coherent light pulses are synchronized and temporally shaped. The resonator cavity possesses a special mean for mode-locking. A stimulus to make robust USP lasers, running at a high pulse repetition rate of 100s kHz and beyond, was introducing a low-loss fast intracavity semiconductor Fabry-Perot saturable absorber, known as SESAM, to start and sustain stable pas- sive mode-locking [1]–[3]. Parameters of SESAM could be easily adopted to particular laser design by variation in the multi-layered structure of semiconducting materials. However, This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

[PAGE 2] 1100112 IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2021 despite signiﬁcant progress in design and manufacturing tech- nologies [4], the resistance of semiconductor structures to laser radiation is limited, leading to SESAM degradation during the operation [5]. Another approach used in the USP laser is the Kerr-lens mode-locking [6], [7] via the nonlinear optical Kerr effect, based onthat,therefractiveindexofamediumisdependentontheelec- tromagnetic ﬁeld strength. This method allows the generation of light pulses with duration down to a few femtoseconds. For example, pulses shorter than two optical cycles with bandwidths over 400 nm have been generated from a Kerr-lens mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser with a repetition rate of 90 MHz [7]. Both those approaches for mode-locking do not well ﬁt with the all-in-ﬁber design of modern ﬁber lasers. Fiber-based USP lasers are attractive because of their compactness, alignment- free set-ups and low cost. Regelskis et al. demonstrated a Yb-doped ﬁber ultra-short pulse generator based on self-phase modulation and alternating spectral ﬁltering, operating at a wavelength of 1060 nm and providing a stable ultra-short pulse train [8]. High intensities conﬁned within a ﬁber core initiate nonlinear phenomena with the dynamic evolution of the gain spectrum. The so-called Mamyshev oscillator scheme is becom- ing popular in ﬁber-based USP lasers [9], [10] with a potential to get high-energy, sub-30 fs pulses from a compact ﬁber source. B. Ampliﬁed Ultra-Short-Pulse Laser Systems The pulse energy available from the oscillator is too low for most applications in material processing, and additional stages for their ampliﬁcation are integrated to make the real industrial tool. Therefore, high power USP lasers are assembled in MOPA (Master Oscillator Power Ampliﬁer) design with regenerative multi-pass ampliﬁers and/or linear power boosters. High inten- sity inside a laser gain media may damage it. D. Strickland and G. Mourou [11] proposed temporal stretching of laser pulses before ampliﬁcation and subsequent their compression. The method called Chirped Pulse Ampliﬁcation (CPA) is a core of all high-pulse-energy femtosecond lasers now. Stretching and compression are realized with pairs of diffraction gratings [12], ﬁber Bragg gratings [13], [14] and volume Bragg gratings [15]. Solid-state lasers with a rod-shaped active media still remain the main type of ultra-short pulse lasers at a power level below 100 W. Due to the broader gain spectrum, Yb-based crystals are used in diode-pumped femtosecond lasers, while Nd-doped crystals are used in the lasers with a pulse duration above 10 ps. Scaling the average power of rod-type lasers is limited by heat, dissipated in solid-state media, which is a byproduct of the lasing and signiﬁcantly impacts lasing performance [16]. Non-uniformly distributed heat within the bulky rod modiﬁes refractive index (thermo-lens), induces stress and physical de- formation of the material, which leads to a wave-front distortion. Fiber or thin-disk geometry of the active laser media facilitates easier removal of heat, signiﬁcantly reducing the detrimental thermo-lensing effect. The advent of ﬁber lasers in the laser processing ﬁeld, es- pecially in macro-processing with continuous-wave (CW) kW- class devices, pushed efforts in the development of robust USP Fig. 1. Pulse energy versus repetition rate of representative state-of-the-art ultrafast lasers based on different geometries, both ampliﬁers and oscillators [24]. sources of coherent radiation. Fiber lasers are associated with high average powers and very high beam qualities needed for many industrial applications [17]. Beneﬁting from excellent thermal management in the active media, beam quality and single-mode operation in 10 kW range, mode-locked operation of ﬁber lasers possess challenges due to extremely high inten- sities inside the core of the ﬁber. The major limitations are im- posed by ﬁber nonlinearities, optical damage, transverse modal in-stabilities and photodarkening [18]. To make stable, practical, and maintenance-free lasers, new types of saturable absorbers with a nanocarbon material and ultra-short pulse compression techniques [19] and scaling the pulse energy and peak power [18] were developed. The performance of ultrafast ﬁber lasers is well deﬁned by the laser parameters, including repetition rate, spectral bandwidth, pulse duration, pulse energy and average power [20]. In contrast to the long active ﬁber, a thin disk is only a few 100’s micrometers thick and requires multi-pass travel through the gain media of the laser light [21], [22]. Efﬁcient heat re- movalthroughthebacksidenearlyeliminatesthethermo-lensing problems. The results for ampliﬁcation of ultra-short pulses to average output powers over 200 W in sub-picosecond regime demonstrate the potential of the thin-disk laser design. The mode-locked thin-disk laser generating 80 μJ of pulse energy 242 W of average output power with a pulse duration of 1.07 ps without additional ampliﬁcation has been demonstrated in [23]. In recent years, signiﬁcant progress in thin-disk ultra-short pulse lasers was achieved, including novel gain materials with broadband gain, efﬁcient external pulse compression using hollow-core ﬁbers, and multi-pass cells (Fig. 1) [24]. Further scaling of average power requires multiplexing the gain ampli- ﬁcation elements to spread the thermal load over several disks. Thin-disk lasers are indispensable in industrial applications. They represent a unique class of lasers that provides kW output power with excellent beam quality, long-term stability, thermal management, and power scalability. Due to multi-pass conﬁgu- ration,thin-disklasersareengineeringmasterpieceswithsophis- ticated multi-mirror arrangements, and the reduced complexity of the laser is highly beneﬁcial. A monolithic pump design for

[PAGE 3] RA ˇCIUKAITIS: ULTRA-SHORT PULSE LASERS FOR MICROFABRICATION: A REVIEW 1100112 Fig. 2. Close-up sketch of wedged thin-disk geometry. Indicated are the wedge angle α, the two incidence angles for pump (ΘP) and lasing (ΘE) radiation, as well as the local thickness d and beam displacement Δr. The upper surface is coated as a long pass, while the bottom (back) side is coated with a wide-angle, highly reﬂective coating glued onto a diamond heat sink [25]. thin-disk lasers and ampliﬁers is demonstrated in [25]. The thin disk is replaced by a thin, wedged gain medium acting as a wedged optical trap (Fig. 2). The efﬁcient coupling of the pump and laser radiation and 890 W of CW output power with the optical-to-optical efﬁciency of 50% has been achieved. C. Power Upscaling of USP Laser to kW Level A wide ﬁeld of materials processing applications requires ultra-short-pulse lasers delivering both high average and peak powers at a high repetition rate and efﬁciency. Most ultra-short pulse lasers utilized in the industry today are in the power range of 10 W to 100 W, when it is still possible to control irradiation of the material by a single laser spot. To be more competitive with alternative technologies, high power lasers with an average power reaching 1 kW and more are on development. A thin-disk multi-pass ampliﬁer for ultra-short laser pulses delivering an average output power of 1105 W, the pulse energy of 1.38 mJ at a duration of 7.3 ps was reported in [26]. The beam quality better than M2 = 1.25 was maintained at that power level. Potentials of power scaling using the thin-disk type lasers were shown by Dietz et al. [27]. An ultra-short-pulse Yb-doped thin-disk laser system without chirped-pulse ampliﬁcation in the multi-pass set-up provided a maximum output power of 1.9 kW at a repetition rate of 400 kHz. The total energy in the four-pulse burst regime was as high as 46.7 mJ at a repetition rate of 25 kHz. A thin-disk laser with output power exceeding 10 kW of and high beam quality and consisting of two thin-disk laser oscillators and a thin-disk multi-pass ampliﬁer system was presented in [28]. Those examples show the great potential of thin-disk lasers to scale up their power in a model-locked regime. The slab geometry of the active media allows heat removal through a side wall for the laser crystal. Therefore, this approach is also utilized in upscaling the average power of USP lasers. One successful example is the Innoslab ampliﬁer comprising a diode-laser end-pumped thin slab crystal and a folded single- pass optical ampliﬁcation path [29]. Up to 5 kW average power, a few Joule pulse energy are possible from the Innoslab design. The complete laser is a complex system and includes a ﬁber MOPA, rod-based ampliﬁer and few stages of Innoslab to get to Fig. 3. Spatially ﬁltered Innoslab MOPA system [29]. more than 0.5 kW power level with excellent beam quality with M2 < 1.2 (Fig. 3). Scaling average power or pulse energy in ultra-short-pulse ﬁber lasers is limited, even utilizing large-mode-area (LMA) or photonic-crystal (PCF) ﬁbers. The limitations come from nonlinearities induced in the core disturbing beam quality and spectrum. Parallel ampliﬁcation and combining multiple beams in a single high-brightness beam is a scalable laser architectural approach. Coherent beam combining (CBC) of 61 femtosecond ﬁber chirped-pulse ampliﬁers with the efﬁciency of ∼50% is demonstrated [30]. The ﬁrst CBC femtosecond laser delivering 10.4 kW average output power was demonstrated in [31] by a coherent combining of 12 step-index ﬁber ampliﬁers. D. GHz Laser Sources for Material Processing A new branch of USP laser sources approaching in recent years is generating a burst of pulses with temporal separation between pulses in nanosecond and picosecond time frames. Ultrafast lasers operating at high repetition rates, particularly the GHz range, enable new potentials in material processing, particularlyaccessingtherecentlydemonstratedablation-cooled regime[32].Ultra-highpulserepetitionrateisawayofupscaling the process efﬁciency. The laser could be implemented in the burst mode to access GHz repetition rates and microjoule-level pulse energies without requiring kilo-watts of average power [33]. The 2.65 GHz repetition rate bursts of ultra-short laser pulses containing a desirable number of pulses within a burst with identical pulse separation and adjustable amplitude were demonstrated in an active ﬁber loop [34]. A burst mode all-ﬁber laser system operating at an intra-burst repetition rate of up to 1.2 GHz with pulse duration <500 fs and average power higher than 100 W [35]. That all-ﬁber laser could be a promising tool for micromachining applications requiring fs pulses with both high average power and high repetition rate. An industrial-grade 100 W femtosecond GHz-burst laser has been developed, delivering total burst energy up to 1 mJ at 100 kHz, with an adjustable number of pulses per burst. The intra-burst repetition rate could be varied between 0.88 and 3.52 GHz, with the maximum number of pulses per burst of 3200 [36], [37]. The solid-state laser system working in a multi-burst regime with a controllable number of pulses and tunable pulse-to-pulse time spacing ranging from 200 ps to 16 ns is presented in [38], [39]. The laser generates pulse bursts of the GHz to MHz repetition rate, with the burst repetition rate

[PAGE 4] 1100112 IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2021 ranging from 100 kHz to a single shot and a constant duration of 300 fs. The GHz intra-burst repetition rate in UV spectral range was achieved based on the fourth-harmonic generation of an electro- optic comb operating in a burst mode which permits ﬂexible repetition rate at the GHz level [40]. An ultra-short pulse laser combined with an external array of birefringent crystals was applied to generate near-THz bursts of single-picosecond pulses at variable delays between consecutive pulses [41]. III. LASER PROCESSING SYSTEMS During the recent ten years, signiﬁcant progress was made in ultra-short pulse lasers, increasing their average power, pulse repetition rate, stability, robustness and ﬂexibility. The process- ing quality, in general, meets the demands of many applications. However, processing with USP lasers still lacks productivity for industrially relevant cases. The average power of a pulsed laser source is the product of pulse energy and repetition rate. There are two approaches for upscaling USP processes [42], [43]: 1) by increasing the pulse energy. 2) by increasing the pulse repetition rate. As the productivity and throughput of material processing using USP lasers should be competitive with alternative tech- nologies, tremendous efforts were also added in progressing of the laser energy management outside of the lasers. A variety of mechanical and optical systems are used to control the position, direction and shape of the laser beam over the workpiece. Material processing utilizing ultra-short laser pulses enables precisefabricationwithanegligiblethermalload.However,even with ultra-short laser pulses, not the whole laser energy absorbed by the target is removed by ablation products. The residual energy is converted to heat which accumulates pulse-by-pulse or scan-by-scan. Heat accumulation occurs due to very short time separation between pulses impinging the same spot on the work- piece [42], [44]. That is a severe problem when high repetition rate (>100s kHz) lasers are applied. Fast motion of the laser beam is required to keep beam overlap within acceptable limits. The multi-pulse irradiation with the laser beam signiﬁcantly lowered the ablation threshold. It led to a relative increase in the ablation rate at the higher repetition rate, but plasma shielding limits the processing efﬁciency of metals with the high-power picosecond lasers [42]. Temperature rise on the workpiece surface has a severe ad- verse impact on the ablation quality in USP laser processing of metals [45]. However, heat accumulation was identiﬁed as the main factor responsible for the enhanced ablation efﬁciency preserving excellent quality during the burst mode processing of diamond-like nanocomposite ﬁlms with femtosecond laser [46]. If the laser is emitting high pulse energy, the processing speed upscaling could be realized by splitting the pulse energy of the incoming beam. Therefore, this kind of lasers is usually applied in a multi-beam processing approach. A. Galvanometric and Polygon Scanners The most robust and convenient fast positioning of a laser beam is achieved utilizing a galvanometric scanner with nearly Fig. 4. Combination of polygon scanner with a galvanometric scanner for fast 2D laser beam deﬂection. Adopted from [55] with permission of JLMN. inertia-less tilting of two mirrors in perpendicular directions. Modern galvoscanners with an f-theta objective of 160 mm focal length move the laser beam at the speed of 20 m/s in the 100 mm x 100 mm ﬁeld [47], [48]. Synchronization of laser pulsing with the motion of the laser beam is becoming challeng- ing at such speed. As most USP lasers are self-mode-locked, external synchronization is not feasible. External synchroniza- tion of galvoscanner from the USP laser clock was proposed by B. Neuenschwander et al. [49]. The precision of pulsing is determined by the pulse repetition rate of the oscillator (seeder), which usually is in the range of 30-100 MHz. The synchroniza- tion facilitates the positioning of small ablation craters from separate laser pulses with the precision of about 1 μm relative to each other at a high laser-beam translation speed. The outcome is a smooth surface at the edges of ablated cavities and a high taper angle of them. The approach was extended for laser engraving of printing and embossing tools with a rotation symmetry with a precision of 1 μm [50]. Polygon scanners, broadly used in imaging and bar-code reading, are still new in the material processing ﬁeld. They are able to move laser beam at a speed of 100–1000 m/s on the workpiece surface [51]–[54]. However, synchronization of USP laser pulsing with highly stable rotation of the polygon is more challenging. Intelligent control systems and software are required. The spatial resolution and precision of laser treatment are limited by the pulse repetition rate of the oscillator. A synchronized high-speed beam deﬂection using polygon scan- ners permits overcoming plasma shielding and heat accumu- lation limitations utilizing multi-MHz USP lasers. The pulse overlapping is reduced due to the very fast scanning speeds, and high-average-power lasers can be used very efﬁciently in high-throughput material processing. Combining a polygon scanner with a single-axis galvoscan- ner, a fast two-dimensional scanner was developed (Fig. 4) and validatedwitha1kWlaserinmulti-passdrillinginstainlesssteel and silicon [55]. The distribution of consecutive laser pulses over the whole laser-treated area decoupled the heat-accumulation and plasma-shielding effects. The new type of resonant scanner with sophisticated control to compensate the oscillation nonlinearities and an additional galvanometerscannerforprocessingtwo-dimensionalﬁeldswas

[PAGE 5] RA ˇCIUKAITIS: ULTRA-SHORT PULSE LASERS FOR MICROFABRICATION: A REVIEW 1100112 Fig. 5. Process landscape for typical USP laser applications based on pulse energy and repetition rate. Diagonal lines of equal average power are marked. Drilling of metallic foils and thin-ﬁlm structuring uses comparable low power <10W. Only some applications, as glass cutting and interference patterning, utilize higher power and pulse energy. Adopted from [67] with permission of JLMN. proposed in [56]. The scanner was applied with a USP laser running at a 5-10 MHz repetition rate to write 1.6 million dots per second with a positioning reproducibility of 1 μm. The dynamic performance of galvoscanners in a small area could be extended by combining an acoustic-optical deﬂector (AOD) with a galvanometric scanner [57]. AOD is able to deﬂect the laser beam pulse by pulse within its scanning ﬁeld and modulate the beam intensity simultaneously. As no mechanical parts are in AOD, it is also used to compensate vibrations and overshoots of fast mirror rotations resulting in process time reduction and processing quality improvement. B. Laser Beam Shaping Most of the lasers are emitting a beam with a Gaussian beam proﬁle. The intensity in the center of the beam is high, and wings of low intensity spread for long distances. Such spatial energy distribution is not beneﬁcial for many applications, especially in thin-ﬁlm processing. Laser beam shaping and homogenization techniques could optimize the shape for a large number of laser- material processing applications. Diffractive optical elements (DOE) are able to transform the circular Gaussian beam into a rectangular-shaped ﬂat-top one, where intensity is preserved in the signiﬁcant part of the beam diameter providing the process- adapted laser beam shaping [58]. Diffractive optical elements offer a wide range of beam pro- ﬁles, but their trade-offs result in reduced brightness and efﬁ- ciency. With advanced diamond tuning technologies, free-form optics is becomingpopular, includingbeamshapingapplications [59]. Free-form refractive optics offer a wide range of proﬁle options for high-power laser beam shapers. They can generate application-speciﬁc beam proﬁles with high efﬁciency. Ultra-short laser pulses are complex with a broad spectrum and alteration during propagation through media, like lenses. A spatiotemporal focusing of femtosecond pulses is applied to concentrate laser pulse energy in time and space for more predictive and efﬁcient material processing [60], [61]. A novel concept for dynamic focus shaping based on highly- efﬁcient (∼90%) coherent beam combining with micro-lens arrays as the combining element was presented in [62]. C. Beam Shaping With Spatial Light Modulators A ﬂexible option for laser beam shaping is the use of spatial light modulators (SLM) based on a pixelated device with electro- switchable liquid crystals. Computer-generated holograms are transferredtoSLMcontrolelectronicstosetaphaseoramplitude mask for the laser beam. SLM is applied with femtosecond lasers to produce multiple diffractive beams for parallel processing, gaining throughput of a high precision micro-structuring of silicon and titanium alloy by more than ten times [63], [64]. Optical SLM efﬁciency into ﬁrst-order beams was ∼50%, and a 50 Hz refresh rate limited the real-time processing. The use of SLM with high power USP lasers (>100 W) require cooling of the device [65]. Usually, SLM is used to split the original laser beam to the desired number of beams with equal intensity. Separation of the laser beam to 400 beams with individually controlled intensity was presented in [66]. The technique was validated by femtosecond laser ablation of grayscale pictures individually set intensity per pixel of a corresponding beam. D. Multi-Beam Systems Using high power USP lasers working at a high pulse repe- tition rate in the MHz region could cause thermal management issues like overheating and melt formation, reducing the ablation quality. A high ablation quality could only be achieved if all process parameters are carefully matched. High beam deﬂection speed using advances galvanometric or polygon scanners not always provide solutions in precise microfabrication. The use of multiple laser beams provides the best and most versatile high power ablation solution [67]. Massively parallel processing could be arranged with high power USP lasers. The beam emitted by the laser is trans- formed into an arrangement of multiple laser beams with speciﬁc intensity distributions [68]. The main challenge in using the multi-beam optical system is the distortion of the spot-array on the workpiece. Active and passive concepts to reduce or eliminate distortion in multi-beam systems are implemented. A fully reﬂective 3x3 beam splitter compatible with high power up to 300 W from a 500 fs-pulse laser is presented in [69]. The process was validated in ablating craters with multiple Gaussian beams with 15 μm diameter and 300 μm pitch. E. Approaches for Laser Processing of Complex 3D Surfaces Ultra-short pulse lasers are well deﬁned for precise fabrica- tion, including ablation of complex cavities in molds, micro- and nanotexturing 3D surfaces. Laser treatment of freeform surfaces is feasible with laser processing systems having a large number of degrees of freedom to position focused laser beam relative to the workpiece [70]. The algorithm incorporates the tessellation of a freeform surface into laser processing ﬁelds, utilizing the capabilities of high dynamics 3D galvoscanners. Limitations

[PAGE 6] 1100112 IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2021 of the particular laser process to focal off-set and the angle of incidence to the process performance should be considered. F. DLIP -Direct Laser Interference Patterning Periodic structures are of increasing interest in many ﬁelds, especially for surface functionalization. Interference of coherent laser beams produces periodic laser intensity patterns, which could be easily imprinted on workpiece surface or ablated in thin ﬁlms [71]. Fabrication time reduction up to a few orders of magnitude using DLIP compared to direct laser writing was evaluated. Various set-ups are utilized for direct laser interference pat- terning (DLIP). Beam splitters and mirrors are usually used in two-beam interference set-ups. In general, it has a lot of freedom to manipulate the angle of incidence and beams orientation. However, such an arrangement for three beams is a quite com- plex and bulky three-dimensional optomechanical system [72]. Diffractive optical elements are applied in multi-beam (3, 4, 6 beams) interference systems to split the initial laser beam and an optical system to combine the beams consisting of a confocal 4f lens system [73], [74], a prism and lens [75]–[77], or mirrors. The process scaling is straightforward by increasing pulse energy. As energy density (ﬂuence) required for ablation, most of the materials is close to 1 J/cm2, a few squared millimeters of the surface are treated by a single laser pulse. The period of the structure depends on the number of interfering beams, the angle between them and the laser wavelength: Λ4 = λ √ 2 · sin Θ (1) where Λ4 is the period of a four-beam interference pattern, θ is the half-angle between opposite beams, and λ is the wavelength of laser radiation. The period could be easily downscaled to the sub-micrometer range using ultra-short pulse lasers [78]. Flexibility in periodic pattern formation has been shown by the adjustment polarization of each interfering beam (Fig. 6) [79]. Application ﬁeld of DLIP in laser surface texturing is expand- ing rapidly from surface wettability control [80], [81], to wear resistance [82], ice-repellent surfaces [83], [84], anti-counterfeit [85], frequency-selective surfaces [73], [79], texturing of hot- embossing tools [86], antibacterial surfaces [87], [88]. DLIP is combined with direct laser writing (DLW) or laser- induced periodical surface structures (LIPSS) to get hierarchical micro-andnanostructures,whichareresponsibleforstablelong- term performance of the functionalized surfaces [77], [81], [84]. IV. APPLICATION OF ULTRA-SHORT PULSE LASERS IN MICROFABRICATION Highly concentrated in time and space energy of ultra-short laser pulse from one side leads to extremely high intensities of light irradiation able to evaporate any material. From another side, the pulse energy can be precisely adjusted, leaving invisible but real modiﬁcations inside of transparent materials. Adding thatUSPlasersbecamereliable,industrial-gradetoolsapproach- ing kW power range, we have a broad ﬁeld of diverse USP lasers applications in material processing. The most substantial Fig. 6. (a) DLIP set-up. The laser beam is split into six beams using diffractive optical element (DOE), and beams are combined on the sample using the two-lens confocal imaging system. (b) Arrangement of laser beam polarizations, simulated periodic intensity proﬁle, its cross-section at selected intensity level corresponding to the metal ﬁlm ablation threshold and SEM images of the structures ablated in thin Cr ﬁlm. beneﬁts are in precise micro- and nanofabrication and unique op- portunities in the localized modiﬁcation of transparent materials, still not fullydiscoveredandbeingat theveryinitial stageof their exploitation. The ablation process could be easily controlled as the material is removed in small quantities. However, a high number of laser pulses is required to ablate a signiﬁcant amount of the material. A. High-Throughput and Precision Ablation of Metals Ultra-short pulse lasers remain complex electro-optical- mechanical systems, and photons emitted by the lasers are still expensive. Tailored utilization of each photon is required for cost-effective introduction into industry and competition with alternative technologies in material processing. Photon energy is absorbed by electrons and transferred to ions in the material. Properties of the material and its response to laser excitation are changing instantaneously. Too little energy does not create permanent modiﬁcation like an ablation crater. Too much energy directed to the target heats the material and ignites plasma which creates detrimental effects on the workpiece. The idea of the existence of the optimal laser irradiation condition for material removal (ablation) was proposed by Furmanski et al. in 2007 [89] and later developed by us [42], [44] and B. Neuenschwander group [90], [91]. As the penetration of light into non-transparent materials is limited by a high absorption coefﬁcient, the amount of material affected by single-pulse irradiation is small. The volume of the laser-ablated crater can be found by integrating the crater proﬁle [89], [44]: V = πw2 0δ 4  ln F0 Fth 2 (2) where w0 is the beam diameter on the surface at the intensity 1/e2 level; δ is the effective absorption depth; Fth is the ablation