[PAGE 1] Damage-free cutting of chemically strengthened glass by creation of sub-surface cracks using femtosecond laser pulses Sanguk Park a, Yunseok Kim b[1_TD$DIF],*[1_TD$DIF], Joonho You b, Seung-Woo Kim (1)a,*[2_TD$DIF] a Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea b Lasernics Co., Republic of Korea 1. Introduction Personal mobile electronic devices such as smartphones and tablets commonly rely on chemically strengthened glass to attain the surface strength against scratches and breakage needed for their display modules. Chemical strengthening is made through post-processing of growing compressive residual stress layers by exchanging small sodium ions in the glass surface with large potassium ions [1]. However, with increasing the magnitude and layer depth of compressive stresses, the glass surface becomes more difﬁcult to cut into pieces by conventional machining methods using abrasive diamond wheels or water jet [2]. Besides, heat-affected damage coupled with surface micro-cracks appears substantial, which has to be removed by extra grinding or chemical cleaning [3]. Meanwhile, efforts are being made to adopt high- power lasers for cutting such difﬁcult-to-cut glass by laser-induced ablation leading to localized melting and subsequent vaporization as attained for most metals [4]. Glass in itself is transparent to most lasers with low resonance absorption, so the average laser power needs to be kept as much as 100 W to cut by ablation or surface cracks using continuous-wave or nanosecond lasers of visible or infrared light [5,6]. The glass surface after cutting consequently turns out heat-affected by excessive laser ﬂuence. On the other hand, ultrashort lasers emitting pulses in the picosecond or femtosecond regime are able to provide very high peak intensities, of 1013 W/cm2 or stronger, with small average power of just few W [7]. Such high laser intensities lead to strong nonlinear absorption underneath the transparent glass surface by means of multiphoton effects, which permits ablation with minimal thermal damage using low laser ﬂuence [8]. Besides, the nonlinear absorption is less dependent on materials, enabling diverse micromachining processes for not only glass but also various optical polymers. The examples include optical waveguide formation [9], Bragg grating fabrication [10], 3- D optical memory construction [11], micro-welding [12] and ablation glass cutting [13]. In this study, an attempt is made to cut chemically strength- ened glass using femtosecond laser pulses. Speciﬁcally, laser irradiation conditions are set to induce sub-surface cracks below the glass surface by nonlinear multiphoton absorption and subsequent creation of tensile residual stresses upon re-solidiﬁca- tion. The resulting sub-surface cracks are guided to propagate in the up-down vertical direction instantly and then gradually follow the lateral movement of the laser beam laterally to complete line cutting. The laser feed speed is optimized to induce sufﬁcient tensile residual stresses without voids formation so that the cutting plane maintains a mirror-like surface quality without signiﬁcant heat-affected zones or micro-cracks. 2. Glass cutting by sub-surface crack propagation The glass specimen dealt with in this study is an ion-exchanged glass (Corning IOX-FS, Gorilla Glass) having a 700 mm thickness. Small sized sodium ions (Na+) within the glass surface region has been exchanged with larger potassium ions (K+) through chemical post-processing in a salt bath as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. Two strengthened layers of 20 mm depth are consequently formed inside the specimen; one underneath the top surface and the other above the bottom surface. The strengthened layers are sustained by compressive residual stresses of 700 MPa, while the central part in between is balanced by weak tensile stresses of 20 MPa. As a result, the glass surface becomes highly resistant to breakage and scratch. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 66 (2017) 535–538 A R T I C L E I N F O Article history: Available online 21 April 2017 Keywords: Glass Laser micro machining Femtosecond laser pulses A B S T R A C T Chemically strengthened glass used for smartphones and tablets is cut into elaborate shapes by creating internal cracks using femtosecond laser pulses. The peak power is set at near ionization intensities of 1014 W/cm2 to initiate sub-surface cracks by strong nonlinear absorption underneath the stress- compressed glass surface at a 560 mm depth. Then sub-surface cracks are laterally guided with a feed- rate of 5–40 mm/s to realize accurate cutting along tensile-residual-stress lines formed around the material-modiﬁed zone inside the glass substrate. The cutting plane maintains a mirror-like cross- section proﬁle without excessive ﬂaws and thermal damage usually seen in conventional laser ablation.  2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of CIRP. * Corresponding author. E-mail address: swk@kaist.ac.kr (S.-W. Kim). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology journal homepage: http://ees.elsevier.com/cirp/default.asp http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2017.04.071 0007-8506/ 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of CIRP.

[PAGE 2] Fig. 2 depicts the optical characteristics of the laser source used in this study. The source is an ytterbium-doped ﬁbre femtosecond laser emitting ultrashort pulses of 150 fs duration. The optical spectrum of the output laser beam has a 20 nm bandwidth about a 1035 nm centre wavelength. The average output power is adjustable from 0 to 16 W by control of the input current to the pumping diode. The repetition rate of the pulse train can be tuned in the range 1–50 MHz. The output laser beam collimated to a parallel beam of 5 mm diameter is incident on the specimen through an objective (X20, Mitutoyo, NA 0.40) to a focal spot size of 3.2 mm diameter. For line cutting, a 2-D planar stage guided by aerostatic bearings is adopted to hold the specimen and provide the lateral motion with a feed speed numerically controlled precisely from 1 to 40 mm/s. The concept of glass cutting attempted in this study using femtosecond laser pulses by means of sub-surface crack propaga- tion is realized as illustrated in Fig. 3. The incident laser beam is focused at a 560 mm depth underneath the top surface. The glass specimen is moved with a 6 mm/s feed speed. The incident laser is set to deliver an average power of 5 W at a 5 MHz repetition rate. This irradiation condition combined with the ultrashort pulse duration raises the pulse peak intensity to 1014 W/cm2, strong enough to induce nonlinear multiphoton absorption and ioniza- tion. Then, despite its low resonance absorption, the transparent glass material heats up from inside with temperature rise above the melting point within a pico-second time scale [14]. Upon the laser beam passes, the molten material zone in the glass specimen undergoes re-solidiﬁcation along with modiﬁcation of the glass material structure [15]. Subsequently, very large tensile stresses remain around the laser focal spot, initiating sub-surface seed cracks expanding instantly along the tensile stress peak in the vertical direction from the bottom to the top surface. For actual cutting of the glass specimen, the incident laser beam starts its lateral movement from one edge, so the seed cracks propagate along the laser feed line until the specimen is cut completely into two pieces. The lateral movement of the sub-surface cracks is found to follow the laser beam with a slight distance lag of several millimetres due to the elapse time consumed for the molten glass to be cooled to complete re-solidiﬁcation. The glass cutting mechanism based on the aforementioned sub- surface crack propagation is evidenced by the material-modiﬁed zone (MMZ) that remains inside the specimen after cutting. The MMZ is clearly seen in the SEM (scanning electron microscope) image of Fig. 3(b) that magniﬁes the cross-section viewed perpendicular to the laser feed line. The MMZ has a teardrop shape running from the laser focal spot upwards to the top surface, with a size of 350 mm in length and 120 mm in width. The cutting plane generated by sub-surface crack propagation from the top to bottom surface is seen not traversing the MMZ, being in fact formed in parallel to its boundary with a lateral offset of 100 mm. Accordingly, the MMZ falls on only one side of the cutting plane, whereas the other side is free from the MMZ and suffers less thermal damage. More importantly, as observed in Fig. 3(c) using an optical microscope, the cutting plane seen along the laser feed line unveils a mirror-like topographical surface quality. The surface roughness turns out to be 0.01 mm in rms when quantiﬁed from the 3-D proﬁle obtained with a confocal microscope as in Fig. 3(d). The glass cutting mechanism achieved by sub-surface crack propagation is investigated further by identifying the residual stresses inside the glass specimen by use of white-light photo- elasticity [16]. For this, as illustrated in Fig. 4, a thin glass specimen prepared to a 3 mm thickness is examined after laser irradiation. The birefringence pattern observed with a circular polariscope reveals no substantial colour variation inside the MMZ, indicating no existence of large stresses within the corresponding region. On the other hand, the same photoelasticity result shows that the [(Fig._1)TD$FIG] Fig. 1. Chemically strengthened glass. (a) Ion exchange on the glass surface. (b) Residual stresses distribution inside the glass specimen. [(Fig._2)TD$FIG] Fig. 2. Characteristics of output laser pulses used in this study for glass cutting. (a) Pulse duration measured by autocorrelation. (b) Optical spectrum. (c) Pulse repetition rate. (d) Average output power. [(Fig._3)TD$FIG] Fig. 3. Glass cutting by sub-surface crack propagation. (a) Cutting geometry, OL: objective lens. (b) SEM image of the cross-section of the modiﬁed region sliced along a–a0 line. (c) Optical microscope image of the cutting-plane along b–b0 line. (d) 3-D surface proﬁle of the cutting plane along b–b0 line measured using confocal microscope. S. Park et al. / CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 66 (2017) 535–538 536

[PAGE 3] MMZ is surrounded by steep colour changes caused by large tensile stresses. Further, the peak trajectory of the calculated tensile stresses coincides well with the cutting plane previously observed around the MMZ by SEM imaging (Fig. 3b). The magnitude of the tensile stresses is estimated large enough to spread the initial seed cracks instantly around the MMZ vertically as well as laterally. It is also noted that two compressive stress layers of 20 mm depth exist in the measured residual stress pattern; one near the top and the other above the bottom surfaces. As previously described in Fig. 1, the two compressive layers have been pre- imposed by chemical strengthening. The central part apart from the MMZ is mostly ﬁlled with red colour representing weak tensile stresses. 3. Cutting condition optimization Materials structural change occurring in response to strong ultrashort laser pulses is affected by not only the incident laser intensity but also the net ﬂuence that represents the total amount of laser energy received in the material. For strong laser intensities of 1014 W/cm2, electrons conﬁned in the lattice structure are excited and ionized by multiphoton absorption and/or tunnelling ionization [17]. At that moment, the bonding force in the lattice structure begins to break, giving rise to materials melting and vaporization. In the subsequent cooling period after pass of the laser beam, the glass material solidiﬁes with structural modiﬁca- tion, leaving the MMZ behind near the laser focal spot [18]. Fur- thermore, if the net ﬂuence increases with more laser pulses being accumulated in the glass material, electrons ionization is accelerated by avalanche ionization with drastic increase of positive ions in the lattice structure [19]. Then, when the density of positive ions inside glass hits a critical level, micro-scale explosions begin to occur due to strong growth of repulsive electric forces between positive ions. This optical breakdown is accompa- nied by high pressure build-up and voids formation in the MMZ after being cooled [20]. When the MMZ undergoes only structural modiﬁcation with moderate net ﬂuence, its volume shrinks with effective formation of tensile residual stresses to initiate sub-surface cracks. On the other hand, if the MMZ experiences voids formation due to excessive net ﬂuence, its volume expands with insufﬁcient development of tensile residual stresses. From the viewpoint of efﬁcient glass cutting by sub-surface cracks, the volume-expand- ing voids formation has to be prevented. For a given laser intensity, the critical parameter triggering voids formation is the feed speed (v) of the laser beam. More speciﬁcally, the net ﬂuence is quantitatively deﬁned as NF = (2R/pwo)(Ep/v) in which R is the pulse repetition rate, wo is the incident beam waist and Ep is the incident laser pulse energy [21]. This implies that lowering the feed speed raises the net ﬂuence with more accumulation of the incident laser pulses per unit material volume. Thus, the feed speed has to be optimized to avoid optical breakdown and at the same time to facilitate sub-surface crack propagation with an appropri- ate amount of net ﬂuence. The effect of the laser feed speed on optical breakdown can be assessed indirectly by line-proﬁling the top glass surface after laser processing. Fig. 5(a) shows the measurement result obtained using a white-light scanning interferometer with varying the feed speed in the range of 1–30 mm/s. When the feed speed is slow to be 1– 3 mm/s, the surface proﬁle appears to take a hump shape, bulging upwards. In this case, the net ﬂuence reaches 70,000–200,000 J/ cm2 as shown in Fig. 5(b). Such large energy accumulation triggers voids formation. Instead, when the feed speed is faster than 3.5 mm/s, the volume expansion is reversed to shrinkage, so the [(Fig._4)TD$FIG] Fig. 4. Photoelasticity for observation of residual stresses. (a) Laser irradiation for specimen preparation. (b) Photoelasticity measurement conﬁguration. (c) Birefringence image. (d) Calculated residual stresses. [(Fig._5)TD$FIG] Fig. 5. Optimization of the laser feed speed. (a) Surface line proﬁles of the top surface across the laser beam path for various laser feed speeds. Vertical offsets are arbitrary. (b) Surface height variation with the laser feed speed. Corresponding net ﬂuence is given on the right vertical axis. S. Park et al. / CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 66 (2017) 535–538 537

[PAGE 4] surface proﬁle converts to a valley shape. At this critical feed speed, the net ﬂuence is calculated to be 67,500 J/cm2. Furthermore, if the feed speed is set faster than 40 mm/s, the net ﬂuence drops below 5000 J/cm2, which is too low to create enough tensile stresses. This implies that the optimum feed speed lies in the range of 5–30 mm/s, which permits sufﬁcient tensile residual stresses to be formed around the MMZ inside the glass substrate to realize accurate cutting. With laser cutting conditions optimized to induce sub-surface cracks without voids fomation, it is possible to produce elaborate shapes by cutting not only straight lines but also curved lines in combination. Fig. 6 shows an example to cut a cover glass panel for smartphones, which has a rectangular shape (120 mm  60 mm) with rounded corners of 5 mm radius of curvature. The multi- faceted shape can be cut straightaway by numerial control of the laser beam path along a single loop numerically programmed to start from a free edge of the specimen. At the beginning and ending sequence of the closed-loop cutting, the laser feed speed needs to be lowered as slow as 5 mm/s. This is necessary to provide sufﬁcient time for the thermal condition near the laser spot to be fully developed for adquate sub-surface crack propagation against the sudden change of the boundary geometry. When the closed-loop cutting is completed, the inner part comes off from the specimen without applying additional force to separate. The cutting-plane line appearing on the top surface shows a 70 mm lateral offset from the laser beam path under which the the MMZ exists. This indicates that the cover glass panel cut out from the specimen excludes the MMZ containing micro-cracks and thermal damage. In addition, visual inspection readily conﬁrms that the cutting plane well main- tains the mirror-like topographical surface quality as previously described in Fig. 3. 4. Conclusion The glass cutting method proposed in this study by adopting femtosecond laser pulses is able to slice chemically strengthened glass into compound 2-D shapes by sub-surface crack propagation. The use of strong laser pulse intensities of 1014 W/cm2 leads to efﬁcient nonlinear absorption of the incident light inside the transparent glass material, which otherwise would be not possible due to low resonance absorption. At the same time, the net ﬂuence is regulated in order to avoid voids formation caused by excessive optical breakdown. This also permits tensile residual stresses to be formed adequately around the material-modiﬁed zone inside the glass substrate. Experimental results conﬁrm accurate cutting can be achieved by guiding the resulting sub-surface crack propagation laterally with a feed speed of 5–30 mm/s. The cutting plane retains a mirror-like cross-section proﬁle without excessive ﬂaws and thermal damage usually seen in conventional laser ablation. The cutting method demonstrated by sub-surface crack propagation in this study has the potential of using femtosecond pulse lasers not only for cutting chemically strengthened glass but also for processing difﬁcult-to-cut materials for diverse applications. Acknowledgement This work was funded by the National Research Foundation of the Republic of Korea (NRF-2012R1A3A1050386). References [1] Nordberg ME, Mochel EL, Garﬁnkel HM, Olcott JS (1964) Strengthening by Ion Exchange. Journal of the American Ceramic Society 47(5):215–219. [2] Zhimalov AB, Solinov VF, Kondratenko VS, Kaplina TV (2006) Laser Cutting of Float Glass During Production. Glass and Ceramics 63(9):319–321. [3] Kang H-S, Hong S-K, Oh S-C, Choi J-Y, Song M-G (2002) A Study of Cutting Glass by Laser. Proceedings of the SPIE 4426:367–370. [4] Plat K, Witzendorff P, Suttmann O, Overmeyer L (2016) Process Strategy for Drilling of Chemically Strengthened Glass With Picosecond Laser Radiation. Journal of Laser Applications 28(2):022201-1–022201-6. [5] Nikumb S, Chen Q, Li C, Reshef H, Zheng HY, Qiu H, Low D (2005) Precision Glass Machining, Drilling and Proﬁle Cutting by Short Pulse Lasers. Thin Solid Films 477(1–2):216–221. [6] Zhao C, Zhang H, Yang L, Wang Y, Ding Y (2016) Dual Laser Beam Revising the Separation Path Technology of Laser Induced Thermal-Crack Propagation for Asymmetric Linear Cutting Glass. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 106:43–55. [7] Liu X, Du D, Mourou G (1994) Laser Ablation and Micromachining With Ultrashort Laser Pulses. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 33(10):1706–1716. [8] Schaffer CB, Brodeur A, Mazur E (2001) Laser-Induced Breakdown and Damage in Bulk Transparent Materials Induced by Tightly Focused Femtosecond Laser Pulses. Measurement Science and Technology 12(11):1784–1794. [9] Davis KM, Miura K, Sugimoto N, Hirao K (1996) Writing Waveguides in Glass With a Femtosecond Laser. Optics Letters 21(21):1729–1731. [10] Zhang H, Eaton SM, Li J, Nejadmalayeri AH, Herman PR (2007) Type II High- Strength Bragg Grating Waveguides Photowritten With Ultrashort Laser Pulses. Optics Express 15(7):4182–4191. [11] Qiu J, Miura K, Hirao K (1998) Three-Dimensional Optical Memory Using Glasses as a Recording Medium Through a Multi-Photon Absorption Process. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics Part 1 37(4B):2263–2266. [12] Miyamoto I, Cvecek K, Okamoto Y, Schmidt M (2014) Internal Modiﬁcation of Glass by Ultrashort Laser Pulse and Its Application to Microwelding. Applied Physics A 114:187–208. [13] Russ S, Siebert C, Eppelt U, Hartmann C, Faißt B, Schulz W (2013) Picosecond Laser Ablation of Transparent Materials. Proceedings of theSPIE 8608. 86080E-1–86080E-11. [14] Rethfeld B, Sokolowski-Tinten K, von der Linde D, Anisimov SI (2004) Time- scales in the Response of Materials to Femtosecond Laser Excitation. Applied Physics A 79:767–769. [15] Miura K, Qiu J, Inouye H, Mitsuyo T, Hirao K (1997) Photowritten Optical Waveguides in Various Glasses With Ultrashort Pulse Laser. Applied Physics Letters 71:3329–3331. [16] Freddi A, Olmi G, Cristofolini L (2015) Experimental Stress Analysis for Materials and Structures: Stress Analysis Models for Developing Design Methodologies, Springer Series in Solid and Structural Mechanics, Springer, Cham, Switzerland. [17] Mao SS, Que´re´ F, Guizard S, Mao X, Russo RE, Petite G, Martin P (2004) Dynamics of Femtosecond Laser Interactions with Dielectrics. Applied Physics A 79(7):1695–1709. [18] Gattass R, Mazur E (2008) Femtosecond Laser Micromachining in Transparent Materials. Nature Photonics 2:219–225. [19] Miyamoto I, Horn A, Gottmann J, Wortmann D, Yoshino J (2007) Fusion Welding of Glass Using Femtosecond Laser Pulses with High-Repetition Rates. Journal of Laser Micro/Nanoengineering 2(1):57–63. [20] Gamaly EG, Juodkazis S, Nishimura K, Misawa H, Luther-Davies B (2006) Laser–Matter Interaction in the Bulk of a Transparent Solid: Conﬁned Micro- explosion and Void Formation. Physical Review B 73:214101-1–214101-15. [21] Eaton SM, Zhang H, Ng ML, Li J, Chen WJ, Ho S, Herman PR (2008) Transition from Thermal Diffusion to Heat Accumulation in High Repetition Rate Femto- second Laser Writing of Buried Optical Waveguides. Optics Express 16(13):9443–9458. [(Fig._6)TD$FIG] Fig. 6. A cutting example of cover glass panel for smartphones. (a) Glass cutting along a looped line combining straight and curved lines. (b) Visual inspection of the cutting plane for surface integrity. S. Park et al. / CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 66 (2017) 535–538 538