[PAGE 1] Research Article Vol. 33, No. 7 / 7 Apr 2025 / Optics Express 14604 Shaping ultrafast Bessel-like beamlets for single-pass laser chamfering of glass CRAIG UNGARO,* LAUREN L. TAYLOR, ZHENG XIONG, AND GARRETT A. PIECH Corning Science & Technology, Corning Research and Development Corporation, Corning Incorporated, 1 Science Center Drive, Painted Post, NY 14870, USA *ungaroc@corning.com Abstract: A methodology to micro-machine glass with a chamfered edge geometry using a single-pass ultrafast laser process is described. An input laser source is shaped into three spatially and temporally coordinated Bessel beamlets with controlled phases, each of which forms a single segment of a continuous C-chamfer shaped intensity profile. Beamlets are simultaneously deployed to induce damage (nanoperforation) extending through the thickness of a glass sample in a single laser shot. The methodology is experimentally demonstrated, generating controlled nanoperforation contours which produce C-chamfer shaped glass edges in a single laser cutting pass. Chamfered glass parts can be easily separated along nanoperforation contours via application of simple mechanical bend stress, with no need for additional post-process release steps, such as etching. This method has the potential to create laser-based chamfers for industrial glass processing applications with fast takt times, minimal waste, and low cost-to-throughput ratios. © 2025 Optica Publishing Group under the terms of the Optica Open Access Publishing Agreement 1. Introduction Ultrafast laser Bessel beam glass cutting coupled with mechanical release is a fast and accurate way to cut and separate glass sheets along arbitrary contours. The laser process, sometimes termed “nanoperforation”, leverages the combination of quasi-nondiffracting Bessel beams and high-intensity ultrafast lasers to form a line of damage which perforates the glass thickness in a single laser shot [1–3]. Translating the glass laterally while the pulsed laser fires forms a contour consisting of nanoperforation lines and connected cracks, which guides separation of the glass into parts [2,4–6]. The shape of the Bessel beam’s focal region can be controlled so that cracks preferentially form parallel to the cutting direction, improving contour quality to facilitate fast part separation using a simple mechanical bending force [7–9]. This controlled nanoperforation process does not require etching, thermal, or other post-process release steps, keeping cost, takt time, and waste generation low. Due to the straight focal line of the Bessel beam, the nanoperforation process typically produces parts with flat edges which form 90° angles with the top and bottom surfaces of the glass sheet. However, many industrial applications require a symmetric C-shaped edge chamfer – an edge geometry with equally-beveled top and bottom corners – to reduce impact-related chipping and cracking or enable passive part alignment. Although the edges of straight nanoperforated parts can be shaped via grinding and polishing, these steps can degrade dimensional accuracy and increase the amount of equipment, processing time, and waste generation required for part fabrication. Establishing laser-based techniques which produce nanoperforated contours with shaped edge geometries can reduce or eliminate these post-process tasks, helping to minimize the cost-to-throughput ratio for chamfered glass parts. Generation of C-chamfer-shaped nanoperforated contours with oriented radial cracks has been achieved by using aberration-corrected Bessel beams to process tilted glass samples [10]. The process uses three laser passes to generate nanoperforated contours corresponding to each #547468 https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.547468 Journal © 2025 Received 14 Nov 2024; revised 5 Mar 2025; accepted 10 Mar 2025; published 24 Mar 2025

[PAGE 2] Research Article Vol. 33, No. 7 / 7 Apr 2025 / Optics Express 14605 facet of the final chamfer geometry. However, the requirements of multiple laser passes and high-precision contour facet registration steps increase fabrication time by >3× compared to straight nanoperforation processes. Curving beams, such as Airy and curving Bessel beams, have also been demonstrated for glass cutting, but lack the ability to make faceted chamfer shapes [11–13]. Single-pass laser-based cutting with flexible edge shaping has recently been accomplished using structured, multifocal Gaussian beam processing [14,15]. However, to our best knowledge, this process has not yet demonstrated the low separation stress (separability) required for compatibility with fast mechanical part release. In this paper, we describe a novel Single-Pass Laser Chamfering (SPLC) methodology for simultaneous cutting and chamfering of glass which preserves the advantages of conventional Bessel beam nanoperforation processes: single-step glass perforation, oriented cracks, and compatibility with fast mechanical part release. Advanced beam shaping is implemented to derive three precisely aligned Bessel “beamlets” from a single ultrafast laser source which form the facets of a quasi-nondiffracting C-chamfer shaped process beam. The beamlets are simultaneously deployed to form through-glass, C-chamfer-shaped damage with a controlled radial crack direction in a single laser shot. We experimentally demonstrate the utility of the SPLC method in symmetric C-shaped chamfering of 0.7 mm thick glass parts which can be separated using only a mechanical bending force. The SPLC process produces consistent, low-roughness chamfered edge geometries with short takt time and no requirement for post-process release or grinding steps, highlighting potential for industrial chamfering with reduced cost-to-throughput ratio and minimized waste. 2. SPLC methodology 2.1. Chamfer beam prescription The SPLC beam developed in this paper is configured to produce a symmetric C-shaped chamfer: a three-facet edge geometry having equally beveled top and bottom corners, with each facet extending through one-third of the glass part thickness. The SPLC methodology shapes a Gaussian ultrafast laser source into three spatiotemporally coordinated Bessel beamlets, each of which generates an individual facet of the chamfer geometry. When deployed simultaneously using an ultrafast laser source and appropriate optical system, the beamlets stitch to form a high intensity C-chamfer-shaped focus enabling single-shot, through-glass nanoperforation. The geometry of the symmetric C-chamfer SPLC beam, along with its transverse amplitude and phase, is illustrated in Fig. 1. The complex field of the SPLC beam at its origin plane is the composite of the three beamlet fields, each of which is determined by defining the field of the Bessel beamlet at its formation plane (z1, z2, or z3 in Fig. 1(a)) and propagating it back to the origin plane. For clarity, we define beamlet fields using a general set of equations with generic subscript, b, and substitute beamlet-specific values, b = 1, 2, or 3, when formulating the composite SPLC beam. The transverse field of a chamfer beamlet at formation plane, zb, is a quasi-nondiffracting Bessel beam based on a radially symmetric axicon phase with controlled amplitude and direction: ub(x, y, z = zb) = Ab(rb) · e−ik·rb·sin(β) · eik·Γb·y (1) In Eq. (1), Ab(rb) describes the beamlet amplitude, where rb = √︂ x2 + (y −yb)2 is the radial coordinate of the transverse plane with respect to the beamlet centroid at (0, yb, zb). The first exponential factor in Eq. (1) describes the axicon phase, where k = 2π λ is the wavenumber and β is the Bessel half-cone angle [16,17], which is equal for all SPLC beamlets. The second exponential factor describes the tilt (angle) of a given chamfer beamlet relative to the optical propagation axis of the composite beam, with slope Γb defined along the y direction. Note that the Bessel beamlet field definition in Eq. (1) could also be modified to incorporate terms to compensate for

[PAGE 3] Research Article Vol. 33, No. 7 / 7 Apr 2025 / Optics Express 14606 Fig. 1. (a) Geometry of the SPLC beam along the optical axis, z, where zo is the beam origin plane and z1−3 correspond to individual beamlet formation planes (starting points). The transverse intensity of the SPLC beam is shown at the beam origin plane. Dotted lines represent beamlet propagation axes at angles θ1, θ2 = 0, and θ3 relative to the main optical axis, and beamlet extents are shown by bold red, black, and blue line segments. (b) Transverse intensity and (c) transverse phase of the SPLC beam at the zo plane showing y-coordinate centroids. Phase was zeroed in regions where each beamlet intensity falls below 1% of its peak, and also in horizontal wedged regions to induce focal spot ellipticity enabling cracks oriented parallel to the cutting direction during experimental nanoperforation. Note the presence of high spatial-frequency phase terms in (c) which are difficult to see in the image. aberrations from refraction into the glass sample during laser processing, such as in [18]. Similar aberration correction methods were considered in early SPLC formulations, but ultimately found to be insignificant for the small Bessel cone angles and beam tilting angles used in this work. The amplitude Ab(rb) in Eq. (1) is defined to control the length and intensity of the focused chamfer Bessel beamlets: Ab(rb) = a0 √rb · {︃[︃ 1 −e− (︂rb Wi )︂Q]︃ · e− (︂rb Wo )︂Q}︃ (2) In Eq. (2), the first factor, a0/√rb , controls the peak intensity of the focused beamlet, where a0 is a scaling factor and the inverse square root term generates a Bessel beam with constant, flat-top intensity along its quasi-nondiffracting focal line [19]. (To circumvent discontinuity, Ab(0) is set to 0.) The second factor includes two super-Gaussian exponential functions which restrict the transverse beamlet amplitude to an annular region (Fig. 1(b)), which truncates the resulting Bessel focal line to match the designed length of the chamfer facet. The width of the first super-Gaussian term, Wi, defines the inner radius of the annulus which controls the formation position of the beamlet relative to zb, and the width of the second super-Gaussian term, Wo, defines the outer radius which controls the beamlet’s longitudinal extent. The exponent, Q, determines the spatial rate at which beamlet amplitude decreases with rb, affecting steepness of corresponding intensity roll-off at the beamlet’s longitudinal endpoints [20]. The tilting phase of each Bessel beamlet (Γb in Eq. (1)) can be determined by evaluating its required propagation trajectory in free space. Non-paraxial beam propagation is described using the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction integral (defined for general field, u), u(x′, y′, z′) = 1 iλ ∞ ∫∫ −∞ u(x, y, z) · zeik·R R dx dy, (3)

[PAGE 4] Research Article Vol. 33, No. 7 / 7 Apr 2025 / Optics Express 14607 where R = √︂ (x′ −x)2 + (y′ −y)2 + z′2. Here, Eq. (3) is implemented via the angular spectrum method [21]. Substituting ub in Eq. (1) for u in Eq. (3) and using the phase of the resulting integrand (denoted Φb), the stationary phase approximation can be applied to determine the location of ray intersections along a beamlet-specific optical propagation axis as a function of rb, following the method of [22]: 0 = ∇x,yΦb |︁|︁|︁|︁|︁|︁|︁|︁|︁x=f(z), y=g(z) (4) For a non-angled SPLC beamlet (b = 2) which propagates parallel to the optical axis of the composite beam, tilt Γb = 0 in Eq. (1), and Eq. (4) is solved for the case f(z) = g(z) = 0. The resulting mapping of z to rb is given by: z(rb) = zb + rb √︄ 1 sin2(β) −1 (5) Here, zb is the position of the beamlet formation plane defined in Fig. 1. For SPLC beamlets tilted in the y-direction (b = 1, 3), |Γb|>0 and propagation occurs along a line defined by f(z) = 0 and g(z) = z · sin(θb), where θb is the beamlet-specific propagation angle defined in Fig. 1. The tilt function Γb can then be found using the stationary phase approximation in Eq. (4), following [22]: Γb = (z −zb) · sin(θb) √︂ x2 + [z · sin(θb) −y]2 + (z −zb)2 (6) In a symmetric C-chamfer, θ1 and θ3 (Γ1 and Γ3) will have equal magnitude, but opposite signs. The complex field of each beamlet at the SPLC origin plane, z0, can be found by propagating formation-plane beamlet fields by a distance of -zb using Eq. (3). The composite complex field of the SPLC beam is then defined by stitching these beamlet fields according to the following inequalities: uSPLC(x, y, zo) = ⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨ ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩ u1, where |u1| ≥|u2| , |u1| ≥|u3| u2, where |u2|>|u1| , |u2| ≥|u3| u3, where |u3|>|u1| , |u3|>|u2| (7) The transverse intensity, |uSPLC|2, and phase, Arg(uSPLC), of the SPLC beam at the origin plane after back-propagation and stitching (Eq. (3), (7)) are respectively shown in Figs. 1(b) and (c). To better emphasize the active area of the transverse phase, a threshold was applied to remove the phase in regions where beamlet intensity falls below 1% of its peak. The distinct diameters of the three beamlets in Fig. 1(b) arise from the differing distances between the origin plane and individual beamlet formation planes. 2.2. Beam shaping strategy To enable concurrent nanoperforation and chamfering of glass, SPLC beamlets are derived from a single Gaussian laser beam and deployed simultaneously using a two-step, phase-only beam shaping strategy. The first step applies a phase, φI, which shapes the input Gaussian laser into the annular intensity distribution describing the origin-plane SPLC beam (Fig. 1(b)). The second step applies phase, φII, which corrects the phase of the composite SPLC beam produced by

[PAGE 5] Research Article Vol. 33, No. 7 / 7 Apr 2025 / Optics Express 14608 the first shaping step to yield the ideal phase of the SPLC beam at the origin-plane (Fig. 1(c)). Experimentally, the SPLC beam is shaped using a spatial light modulator (SLM) in a magnified space (input beam diameter ∼4 mm) to enable high resolution phase control and avoid damage of the SLM by the ultrafast laser source. In the magnified space, beamlet propagation angles are typically less than two degrees, so paraxial approaches are used to determine beam shaping phase solutions. Additional details and a diagram of the experimental setup are provided in Section 3. High efficiency solutions for φI are numerically determined using a Fourier-transform-based Gerchberg-Saxton (GS) algorithm with a spherical seed phase [23]. Here, φI represents the combined phase of independent beamlet solutions, φIb, where b = 1, 2, or 3. Beamlet phases were solved independently to improve algorithm convergence. During the execution of the GS algorithm, each φIb phase solution is centered about the centroid of the input Gaussian laser beam and confined to a concentric annular region which mimics the shape of the SPLC beamlets at the origin plane. The width of each annulus is controlled along the radial coordinate, rI = √︂ x2 I + y2 I , to distribute input laser energy equally across all beamlets. To achieve faster convergence and reduce error, each φIb phase solution is determined under the assumption that the forming beamlet propagates straight along the optical axis. Prism phases, γb, are then added to φIb to properly deflect the beamlets to their designed centroids, (0, yob), at the SPLC origin-plane. The composite phase φI results from stitching φIb solutions according to the following inequalities: φI = ⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨ ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩ φI1 + γ1, 0<rI<rI1 φI2 + γ2, rI1<rI<rI2 φI3 + γ3, rI2<rI<rI3 (8) Here, rIb describes the radial extent of each beamlet-specific annular phase solution. The complex field of the laser source after the application of φI is given by: uϕI = aI e −r2 I w2 0 eiϕI (9) Here, aI and w0 are the respective amplitude and radius of the input Gaussian source. The field of the beam at the location of the second beam shaping step (e.g., output plane of the GS algorithm) is determined by Fourier transforming Eq. (9). The phase carried after the transform operation must be removed to yield the ideal uSPLC phase, handled by applying φII in the second beam shaping step: φII = Arg(uSPLC) −Arg(F {uϕI }) (10) After application of φII, the complex field of the composite SPLC beam is given by: uϕII = F {uϕI } eiϕII ≈uSPLC (11) Here, uϕII approximates the ideal, prescribed uSPLC field due to the numerical nature of the φI phase solution. In experiment, the theoretical φII phase from Eq. (10) is modified to improve the quality of both beam shaping and nanoperforated contour generation. φII = T · M · {[Arg(uSPLC) −Arg(F {uϕI })] + C} (12) A carrier prism, C, is added to the SPLC phase to separate the beam from zero-order diffraction, which is removed in experiment via spatial filtering [24]. A thresholding function, T, is applied to remove noise in beam shaping by zeroing regions of the phase where SPLC beamlet intensity falls below a certain threshold value, typically 1% of its peak. A mask function, M, is used to

[PAGE 6] Research Article Vol. 33, No. 7 / 7 Apr 2025 / Optics Express 14609 zero small wedges of φII beamlet phases to induce slight transverse ellipticity of the SPLC beam, encouraging nanoperforation cracks oriented parallel to the cutting direction to improve contour compatibility with fast mechanical part separation [7,10,25]: M = 3 ∏︂ b=1 H (︃ Pb −Θw 2 )︃ (13) Here, M describes the composite mask for all beamlets and H is the Heaviside step function, defined such that H(0) = 0. The Heaviside argument compares the polar coordinates at a given beamlet centroid to the desired subtended angle of the mask wedges, Θw, in radians. The function of Pb is to orient the wedges to properly control the direction of transverse SPLC beam ellipticity: Pb = |︁|︁|︁ (︂ Θb −π 2 )︂ % π −π 2 |︁|︁|︁ (14) In Eq. (14), Θb is the angular coordinate of an SPLC beamlet with polar coordinate origin defined at its centroid, and % represents the modulo operator. The result of Eq. (13) is a binary mask which is equal to one everywhere, except at the location of 6 wedges (2 per beamlet), where it is equal to zero. When this mask is multiplied in Eq. (12), it removes the φII phase in the wedged regions, shown as black wedges in Fig. 1(c). Note that un-diffracted light from zeroed phase regions is blocked via spatial filtering. 3. Experimental technique The experimental SPLC beam shaping system is shown in Fig. 2. A single SLM (Meadowlark 1920 × 1152 LCOS SLM; 9.2 µm pixels) is used to form the SPLC beam by sequentially applying φI and φII to an incoming Gaussian laser beam in two beam shaping steps. The device is used in a double pass configuration, where one section of the active area applies φI, and a second section applies φII. Between application of φI and φII, the SPLC beam is Fourier transformed using a 250 mm focal length lens, positioned so that the transform plane is co-located with the second SLM impingement. Following beam shaping, the SPLC beam is demagnified using a 4F optical relay with 1:15 magnification ratio to resize the beam for 0.7 mm thick glass processing. Within the 4F relay, a spatial filter is used to block zero-order diffraction and from regions in φII where the carrier prism was not applied. A laser focusing objective with NA = 0.45 (OptoSigma) is used as the final lens in the 4F relay to ensure high beam quality. To evaluate the geometry and intensity of the focused SPLC beam, the glass sample in Fig. 2 can be replaced by a microscope objective and CMOS camera to capture transverse images of the beam along the z-axis. Single-Pass Laser Chamfering experiments were conducted using a 1030 nm ultrafast laser system (Amplitude Tangor) emitting bursts of laser pulses with up to 1 mJ energy and 100 kHz repetition rate. The beam diameter upon first SLM incidence was configured to be ∼4 mm to ensure high beam shaping resolution by making use of the majority of the SLM’s area. In SPLC nanoperforation experiments, 9-ps laser pulses were used in 4-pulse bursts, with a temporal pulse spacing of 25 ns. Burst energy was controlled to deliver 160 µJ to the glass sample, enabling high-quality nanoperforations sufficient for mechanical part release. The delivered energy was 18% of the input laser energy due to losses dominated by SLM efficiency (∼50% throughput per pass) and the final focusing objective. Laser nanoperforation damage contours with cracks oriented parallel to the cutting direction were generated by translating glass substrates along the SPLC x-axis during pulsed laser operation, where translation speed and laser repetition rate were controlled to achieve 3 µm spacing between shots. Quality and roughness of experimentally chamfered parts were evaluated using Keyence VHX-6000 and VK-X1000 digital optical microscopes.