[PAGE 1] Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optik journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijleo Original research article An analytical model to predict the sizes of modiﬁed layer in glass with femtosecond Bessel beam Kai Liaoa,b,c, Wenjun Wanga,b,c,⁎, Xuesong Meia,b,c, Jianlei Cuia,b,c, Ming Lid, Xun Lid a State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing System Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 99 Yanxiang Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710054, China b Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robots, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 28 West Xianning Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, China c School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 28 West Xianning Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, China d State Key Laboratory of Transient Optics and Photonics, Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics of CAS, Xi’an 710119, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Femtosecond bessel beam Sizes of modiﬁed layer Analytical model Regression analysis Range analysis A B S T R A C T Femtosecond Bessel beam is advantageous in high-quality glass cutting because of its resistance to diﬀraction. However, the sizes of the modiﬁed layer in the glass ablated by Bessel beam can be aﬀected by many factors. In this study, an analytical model to predict the sizes(the depth and the maximum diameter) of modiﬁed layer in glass with femtosecond Bessel beam based on an axicon through an orthogonal experiment L16(44) was conducted. The coeﬃcient values of four factors are obtained through the Matlab multiple linear regression function based on the experimental data. Simultaneously, the signiﬁcance of the regression equation was tested by using the F-value test and the veriﬁcation test. It found that the experimental results are consistent with the the- oretical results. The combined processing parameters with the largest aspect ratio are determined through the range analysis and the inﬂuence of the various factors on the sizes was obtained. Finally, an application of thin glass cutting by the internal modiﬁcation and breaking process is demonstrated. The glass is well cut with the chipping on the breaking edge < 10 μm. 1. Introduction With the rapid development of 3C, integrated electronics, MEMS, photovoltaic and other industries, high-tech products such as liquid crystal display (LCD), plasma display (PDP), integrated chip, ﬂexible display (OLED) came into being. Transparent materials such as glass are widely used in mobile phones, notebook computers, tablets, micro-machines and other electronic devices [1–8]. Especially, in the aerospace ﬁeld, research on laser cutting glass is required for key components of inertial instruments such as quartz vibrating beam accelerometer metal pendulum, high-precision accelerometer quartz pendulum, MEMS gyroscope, etc. The reason for glass is so widely used is that it as a transparent solid material has many unique properties not found in other materials. It has excellent optical properties, reﬂecting, bending, transmitting and absorbing light, with high transparency throughout the entire viewing range. In terms of chemical properties, glass is an inert material that is resistant to corrosion. Glass is an excellent insulator in terms of heat and electricity. From the point of view of physical properties, the surface of the glass is hard and scratch-resistant. Quartz glass is made by melting a variety of pure natural quartz. The coeﬃcient of linear expansion is extremely small, which is 1/10- 1/20 of ordinary glass, and has good thermal shock resistance. It has high heat resistance, often used at temperatures between 1100 and 1200 °C, and short-term use temperature can reach 1400 °C. So, it is very meaningful to carry out research on transparent https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2019.03.071 Received 28 January 2019; Accepted 15 March 2019 ⁎ Corresponding author at: State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 99 Yanxiang Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710054, China. E-mail address: wenjunwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (W. Wang). Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 185 (2019) 232–241 0030-4026/ © 2019 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved. T

[PAGE 2] material micromachining. In the production of these products, the glass needs to be cut. At present, glass cutting mainly has traditional and non-traditional processing methods. Traditional processing is mainly cut by diamond cutter wheels and the cutting quality is poor [9]. Non-traditional methods include water jet and laser processing [10–15]. In recent years, ultrafast lasers have become the focus of research due to their high processing accuracy [16–24]. The femtosecond laser has high peak power and can penetrate the air to form the ﬁlament. Its processing precision and processing range are superior to the picosecond laser. Although the Gaussian beam can also form the ﬁlament, its length is limited. The diameter is not easy to control, which is disadvantageous for precision machining. The femtosecond Bessel beam has the characteristic that the light intensity dis- tribution along the beam propagation direction does not change, which makes it possible to complete the laser focus position without moving the laser during the processing. In order to reduce the damage of the surface of the material during the cutting process, a stealth dicing method is proposed. It forms a modiﬁed layer inside the material by laser and then applies external stress to separate the materials. Its schematic diagram is as shown in Fig. 1. The formation of the modiﬁed layer requires the laser energy density to be greater than the material ablation threshold. The depth of the modiﬁed layer determines the thickness of the material that can be cut. The maximum diameter of the modiﬁed layer has a great inﬂuence on the uniformity of the cross-section of the material after cutting. However, the sizes of the modiﬁed layer in the glass ablated by Bessel beam is aﬀected by many factors. Therefore, it is necessary to establish an model to predict the sizes of modiﬁed layer in the with femtosecond Bessel based on the ﬁlamentation eﬀect so as to better guide the selection of femtosecond shaping laser processing parameters and improve the processing quality and eﬃciency. In this work, an analytical model of modiﬁed layer sizes(the depth and the maximum diameter) in glass with femtosecond Bessel beam based on an axicon through an orthogonal experiment L16(44) was conducted. The coeﬃcient values of four factors of the pulse energy, the distance between the axicon and the primary lens, the scanning speed and the incident spot diameter are obtained through the Matlab multiple linear regression function based on the experimental data. Simultaneously, using the F-value test to test the signiﬁcance of the regression equation and the veriﬁcation test was carried out. It found that the experimental results are consistent with the theoretical results. The combined processing parameters with the largest aspect ratio are determined through the range analysis and the inﬂuence of the various factors on the sizes was obtained. Finally, the modiﬁcation process of the femtosecond Bessel beam is demonstrated for glass precise cutting with a modiﬁcation and breaking process. 2. Theoretical approach The non-diﬀractive property of the Bessel beam is expressed as the intensity and magnitude of the center spot of the beam, which remains substantially constant over a ﬁnite range of propagation distances. Under the condition that the center spot and the Gaussian beam width of the Bessel beam are the same, the transmission distance of the Bessel beam center spot is much larger than the Rayleigh length of the Gaussian beam. Therefore, the Bessel beam is applied to laser cutting and punching in recent years and to be the focus of research. There are many methods for generating Bessel beams. In this paper, the axicon method is used [25–27]. 2.1. Intensity distribution of the Bessel beam Analysis of the spatial light intensity distribution of shaped beams based on the ﬁrst Bessel function approximation. The basic principle is to assume that the axicon is a thin lens and the Bessel beam generated by adding a boundary condition to the ideal Bessel beam limits its lossless, non-changing, inﬁnite extension. The laser energy ﬁeld caused by the axicon has a Bessel beam characteristic in a limited range along the optical axis direction and thus serves as a longitudinal boundary condition. The incident beam adopts the ground state Gaussian model to introduce the horizontal boundary condition. The spatial intensity distribution of the Bessel beam obtained by model simulation is calculated. Its intensity proﬁle is [28–30]: = ⋅ − ⋅ I r z kπI θz θz ω J kr θ ( , ) 2 tan exp( 2 tan ) ( tan ) B 0 2 2 2 0 2 0 (1) Where r and z are the radial and longitudinal coordinates respectively, I0 and ω0 are the intensity and beam waist of the incident Gaussian beam, k is the wave vector and θ is the inclination of the Bessel beam. J x( ) 0 represents zero-order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind. The intensity distribution of the Bessel beam along the propagation direction as shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen from the ﬁgure that the light intensity distribution appears as the ﬁrst increase and then decay as the beam propagates. Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of stealth dicing and modiﬁed layer(De: depth of the modiﬁed layer, Di: maximum diameter of the modiﬁed layer). K. Liao, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 185 (2019) 232–241 233

[PAGE 3] 2.2. Two-stage Bessel beam In order to realize femtosecond laser micromachining, a combination of an axicon and a 4f system is generally used to shorten the Bessel beam depth of ﬁeld. The Bessel beam is formed as shown in Fig. 3. The incident Gaussian beam ﬁrst passes through the axicon and forms a Bessel interference region (Primary Bessel zone) under the cone refraction. Due to the long depth of ﬁeld, the power density is low, which is insuﬃcient for ablation processing. In order to increase the power density at the focal spot to reach the ablation threshold of the target and above, Two lenses with focal planes coincident (or a combination of lens and objective lens) is generally used to compress the depth of ﬁeld, which is called the 4f system or the telescope system. The purpose of the two lens focal planes must be coincident to ensure that the compressed beam remains a parallel interference Bessel beam (secondary Bessel re- gion).the focal planes of the two lenses must coincide to ensure that the compressed beam remains a parallel interference Bessel beam. In order to provide guidance for the construction of subsequent experimental light paths the variation law and aﬀected factors of the characteristic parameters (depth of ﬁeld, inclination, working distance, etc.) of the ﬁnal two-stage Bessel area beam and the sizes of each key parameter in the whole beam shaping process are obtained [28]. The Bessel beam generation process based on the axicon is shown in Fig. 3. Where γ is the cone angle of the axicon and n is the refractive index of the axicon material. u is the distance from the apex of the axicon lens to the lens 1, Z is the length of the primary Bessel region, and L is the length of the secondary Bessel region. The inclination of the Bessel beam generated by the incident Gaussian beam passing through the axicon(θ) can be obtained by the law of refraction： = ⋅ − ≈ − ⋅ θ n γ γ n γ arcsin ( sin ) ( 1) (2) This angle depends on the axicon parameters (apex angle and optical index). Moreover, simple geometrical consideration shows that the length of primary Bessel beam (Z), also called depth of focus, can be estimated by this following formula: = Z D θ 2 tan (3) where D is the incident Gaussian beam diameter on the axicon.The central core radius (r) of the Bessel beam at zero intensity point is given by the following formula: = r λ π θ 2.4048 2 sin (4) Fig. 2. Intensity distribution of the Bessel beam based on an axicon. (a) the axial intensity distribution; (b) the radial intensity distribution. Fig. 3. The Bessel beam generation process based on the axicon lens. K. Liao, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 185 (2019) 232–241 234

[PAGE 4] The length of the Bessel beam is tuned to the glass thickness using D, L1 and L2 lenses. The length of the secondary Bessel beam is deﬁned by the following formula [31]: = = L Z n M D n θ M • • 2 tan • 2 2 (5) where M is the magniﬁcation factor ( = M f f/ 1 2) and n is the refractive index. The Bessel beam intensity distribution after 4f system is shown in the Fig. 4. = ⋅ ⋅ − − I r z kπI θ M z J kr θ M ( , ) 2 tan [arctan(tan • )] exp( ) ( tan[arctan(tan • )]) B θ M z ω M 0 2 2 tan [arctan(tan • )] 0 2 2 2 2 02 2 (6) The secondary Bessel beam obtained by compressing the primary Bessel beam has a higher energy density, which is beneﬁcial to the precise processing of glass materials. 2.3. The basis of analytical model Analytical modeling method is mainly used for a large number of tests on speciﬁc lasers and samples, and the formula for the sizes and inﬂuence factors of the internal modiﬁed layer in glass materials is obtained. It is highly targeted and can make the nonlinearity of complex laser and glass materials. The absorption process is transformed into a speciﬁc mathematical model suitable for parameter optimization during the cutting process of the glass material. Therefore, the orthogonal formula method is used to predict the sizes of the modiﬁed layer in the femtosecond laser processing glass material. In the process of actual femtosecond laser ablation of glass materials, there is a nonlinear relationship between the sizes of the modiﬁed layer and the laser processing parameters. In this paper, the relationship between them is established by establishing an exponential relationship between the sizes of the modiﬁed layer and the laser processing parameters, namely: = L Ce v u d a a a a 1 2 3 4 (7) Where C is the comprehensive inﬂuence factor, e is the single-pulse energy(μJ/pulse), v is the scanning speed(mm/s), u is the distance Fig. 4. The Bessel beam intensity distribution after 4f system. (a) the axial intensity distribution; (b) the radial intensity distribution. K. Liao, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 185 (2019) 232–241 235

[PAGE 5] between the axicon and the primary lens (mm), d is the diameter of the incident spot. a1, a2, a3, a4 are the undetermined coeﬃcients. Find the logarithm on both sides of equation and get: = + + + + L C a e a v a u a d lg lg lg lg lg lg 1 2 3 4 (8) Let = Y L lg , = a C lg 0 , = X e lg 1 , = X v lg 2 , = X u lg 3 , = X d lg 4 , then (8) can be converted into: = + + + + Y a a x a x a x a x 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 (9) Using Matlab multiple linear regression function to carry out regression analysis on the transformed experimental data, ﬁnd the value of each coeﬃcient in formula (8), and then reverse the value of each coeﬃcient in Eq. (7), the depth and the maximum diameter of the modiﬁed layer in exponential form can be obtained to establish an analytical model. Simultaneously, the regression equation is tested for signiﬁcance. The F-value test is used to test the signiﬁcance of the regression equation. The F-value test stipulates that the number of test factors is m, the number of times is n, and the given signiﬁcance level is: 0.05, if F < F0.05(m,n-m-1), there is no obvious linear relationship between Y and Xi and the regression equation is not credible; if F0.05(m,n-m-1) < F < F0.01(m,n-m- 1), there is a signiﬁcant linear relationship between Y and Xi; if F > F0.01 (m, n-m-1), there is a very signiﬁcant linear relationship between Y and Xi. 3. Experiment 3.1. Experimental setup A Nd:YLF solid state femtosecond laser system (Spitﬁre Ace, Spectra-physics Inc.) based on pulse regenerative ampliﬁcation was used. The laser system delivers 120-fs-width pulses with a maximum power of 5 W at a repetition rate of 1 kHz, and it operates at the wavelength of 800 nm. The laser beam has a Gaussian energy density distribution with a beam diameter of 12 mm (@ 1/e2). A diaphragm is used to shape the laser beam, and a pyroelectric detector is used to monitor the laser power in real-time in conjunction with a beam-splitter located along the primary laser path. It is equipped with OWIS produced by the German company. 3D high- precision motion platform with a movement accuracy of 0.1 μm. The femtosecond laser processing system is shown in Fig. 1. The glass sample is ﬁxed on a three-dimensional high-precision motion platform, and the sample is processed by a numerical control program. The laser scanning velocity, the scanning length could be set via the software. An axicon with an apex angle of 176 deg (AX252-B, from Thorlabs) was used to transform the incident Gaussian beam into the Bessel beam. The 4f system consists of a 300mm-focal length as L1 lens and a 10x/NA 0.28 microscope objective as L2 lens, the magniﬁcation M is about 15. The experiment used quartz glass as the processing target. Schematic illustration of the experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 5. After laser processing, the quartz glass sample was washed in an ultrasonic cleaner with acetone, ethanol and deionized water for 10 min respectively. Then, through the ultra-depth microscope observation, the internal modiﬁed layer morphology of the glass was as shown in Fig. 6. It can be see that the modiﬁed layer morphology in glass is consistent with the transverse light intensity dis- tribution of the femtosecond laser Bessel beam. The depth and maximum diameter of the modiﬁed layer are deﬁned in Fig. 6, denoted by De and Di respectively. 3.2. Factors and level table Theoretical analysis shows that there are four main factors aﬀecting the sizes of the modiﬁed layer in the glass: pulse energy, scanning speed, distance between the axicon and the primary lens (indicated by u in the table) and the diameter of the incident spot. The quartz glass sample is used. According to experiments and experience, four experimental levels of every factor are determined, and an orthogonal table L16(44) is chosen as an experimental scheme. Fig. 5. Schematic illustration of the experimental set-up. OA: optical attenuator, M: mirror, MS: electromechanical shutter, OL: objective lens. K. Liao, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 185 (2019) 232–241 236

[PAGE 6] 3.3. Design for experimental scheme Orthogonal experimental design needs to ensure horizontal uniformity and uniformity of distribution. Each level of factors and factors selected by the test can fully reﬂect the test, and the number of occurrences of the factors and the number of matches between the factors are the same, that is, the above is ensured. The two-point feature is the basis for a clear expression of the orthogonal experiment. The uniform horizontal distribution of test factors achieves a neat comparison and uniform dispersion between factors and levels, greatly reducing the number of experiments, and is an economical and eﬃcient test method. In this paper, the experi- mental design of the depth and the maximum diameter of the modiﬁed layer in quartz glass is carried out. The main considerations are pulse energy, scanning speed, distance between the axicon and the primary lens and the diameter of the incident spot. This kind of arrangement can meet the requirements of the research content. If the four factors are used for uniform matching, 256 tests are needed, which not only wastes time, but also wastes time. The orthogonal experimental design method using 4 factors and 4 levels only requires 16 tests, which can eﬀectively reduce the number of tests without greatly aﬀecting the accuracy of the test results, and greatly reduce the eﬃciency of processing test results. This paper selects the the depth and the maximum diameter of the modiﬁed layer as the test target, and establishes a 4-factor 4-level orthogonal experimental table L16(44), as shown in Table 1: 4. Results and discussion 4.1. regression analysis Using Matlab multiple linear regression function to carry out regression analysis on the transformed test data, ﬁnd the value of Fig. 6. the morphology of the modiﬁed layer in glass. Fig. 7. modiﬁed layer in glass observed with an ultra depth microscope of diﬀerent experiment numbers. K. Liao, et al. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 185 (2019) 232–241 237