[PAGE 1] Research Article Vol. 30, No. 4 / 14 Feb 2022 / Optics Express 4954 Temporal-spatial characteristics of filament induced by a femtosecond laser pulse in transparent dielectrics GUOQI REN, YUSUKE ITO,* HUIJIE SUN, AND NAOHIKO SUGITA Department of Mechanical Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan *y.ito@mfg.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp Abstract: The evolution mechanism of femtosecond laser-induced filaments has been widely investigated owing to its application prospects in microprocessing. However, the material dependence of the excitation, stability, and decay of filaments is not well understood despite the importance of their precise utilization. In this study, the spatiotemporal evolution of filaments induced by a single femtosecond laser pulse in sapphire and silica glass was investigated using time-resolved pump-probe shadowgraphy on femtosecond and picosecond timescales. The results revealed that the evolution was significantly different in the two typically transparent dielectrics in terms of the electronic plasma dynamics and filament lifetimes. This difference can be attributed to the self-trapped excitons (STEs) in silica glass. Furthermore, the filament dependence on pump energy and focal position was experimentally analyzed. Divergent filaments were observed when the focal position was near the surface because of the effect of the excited plasma on beam propagation. Moreover, the evolution of filament length in the two materials was discussed. This study contributes to the applications of filaments in precise processing. © 2022 Optica Publishing Group under the terms of the Optica Open Access Publishing Agreement 1. Introduction Filamentation is formed by the dynamic balance between Kerr self-focusing and electronic plasma defocusing during femtosecond laser pulse propagation in transparent dielectrics [1,2]. It has received extensive attention owing to its potential applications in microprocessing fields [3], such as micro drilling [4–7], micro welding [8], waveguide writing [9,10], grating fabrication [11,12], and scribing [13]. The processing mechanism depends on the interaction between femtosecond laser pulses and matter, and the properties of induced filaments, especially the extended propagation length [6,13] and excited electronic plasma [4,14]. Therefore, understanding the formation rules and characteristics of filaments is useful for the precise control of microprocessing applications of femtosecond lasers. Several previous studies have focused on the peak intensity and decay time of electrons excited by ultrafast laser pulses. Mao et al. [15] captured time-resolved images of plasma filaments induced by a femtosecond laser pulse in borosilicate glass and measured the spatial variation of the excited electron density. Huang et al. [16] investigated the temporal-spatial dynamics of the peak electron density in a filament induced by a single femtosecond laser pulse in fused silica and calculated the critical electron density of material damage. Pan et al. [17] researched the evolution of electrons excited by double femtosecond pulses and analyzed the influence of the first pulse on subsequent filament formation during the second pulse. Moreover, the relaxation process of excited electron plasma induced by ultrafast lasers in transparent dielectrics was well clarified using the transmissivity measurements of probe beams [18,19]. In addition, the parameter dependence of the filament formation laws was investigated. Wang et al. [20] observed filament splitting during multipulse ablation of fused silica and revealed the effect of pre-pulse-ablated craters on the filaments induced by subsequent pulses. Sun et al. [21] #449874 https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.449874 Journal © 2022 Received 30 Nov 2021; revised 23 Jan 2022; accepted 23 Jan 2022; published 1 Feb 2022

[PAGE 2] Research Article Vol. 30, No. 4 / 14 Feb 2022 / Optics Express 4955 analyzed the influence of pulse duration on the filamentation behavior, which was explained using ionization mechanisms. Nevertheless, the material dependence of the excitation, stability, and decay of filaments has not been well investigated despite the significance of their precise applications. In this study, a pump-probe setup was constructed to investigate the evolution of filaments induced by a single femtosecond laser pulse in sapphire and silica glass using time-resolved shadowgraphy on femtosecond and picosecond timescales. The material dependence of the evolution was experimentally analyzed in terms of the dynamics of the electronic plasma and the lifetime of the filaments. In addition, experiments were conducted to clarify the dependence of filaments on pump energy and focal position. The characteristics of the filaments are further summarized and discussed. 2. Methods 2.1. Experimental setup The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1. A Yb:KGW laser system was used to generate femtosecond pulses with a wavelength of 1030 nm and pulse duration of 170 fs. Each delivered pulse was split into pump and probe pulses using a beam splitter. A quarter-wave plate was used to convert the pump to a circularly polarized wave which was then focused onto a sample using an objective lens OL1 (Mitutoyo; M Plan Apo NIR 10×) with a focal length of 20 mm. The probe pulse was frequency-doubled by a beta barium borate (BBO) crystal, and then illuminated the sample perpendicularly to the pump pulse. The transmitted probe pulse was collected using a second objective lens OL2 (Mitutoyo; M Plan Apo NIR 20×), and the filament shadowgraph was imaged on a cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) (Bitran; BU-55LN). The CCD was synchronized with the femtosecond laser system so that one image corresponded to each pump pulse. Time-resolved imaging was realized using an optical delay line consisting of two reflectors, which enabled a probe pulse delay ranging from femtoseconds to sub-nanoseconds. Images with increasing probe delays were sequentially recorded, which revealed the evolution of the filaments. The short-pass filter (SPF) after the BBO was used to exclude the remained 1030 nm light from the probe pulse, and the SPF in front of the CCD was used to suppress the disturbance caused by the scattered pump pulse and plasma radiation. Two samples with polished surfaces were used in the experiment; one was amorphous silica glass, and the other was single-crystal sapphire. The sample was mounted on a three-directional moving stage; thus, the incidence points and focal positions of the pump pulses on the sample were adjustable. Another CCD was used to find the surface of the sample using white-light illumination. 2.2. Definition and parameters To precisely control the focal positions into the samples, the focuses of the pump pulses were measured at different energies. The surface of the sample was firstly found by the white-light CCD, and the surface position, corresponding to the focus of white light, was defined as Y = 0 µm, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Then, a single pump pulse was used to drill a piece of silicon sample that was opaque to the 1030 nm laser, and numerous holes were obtained by moving the sample along the Y direction with a step size of 5 µm; the sample position where the minimum hole occurred was defined as the focus. The difference of focuses between the pump pulse and white light was YF(E), illustrated in Fig. 2(a), where E was the pump pulse energy, and the results are shown in Fig. 2(b). It indicates that the focuses of the pump pulses were between the objective lens and the focus of white light. The difference increased as the power increased owing to the positive correlation between the self-focusing effect and the energy. In the experiments, the focal position inside the sample was changed by moving the sample along the beam propagation direction. The sample surface was firstly adjusted to the focal plane

[PAGE 3] Research Article Vol. 30, No. 4 / 14 Feb 2022 / Optics Express 4956 Fig. 1. Schematic of the experimental setup. BS: beam splitter; BBO: beta barium borate; SPF: short-pass filter; R: reflector; λ/4: quarter-wave plate; DM: dichroic mirror; OL: objective lens (OL1and OL2); TL: tube lens. Fig. 2. (a) Schematic of the focuses. (b) Focus difference vs pump pulse energies. (c) Zero delay and delay time in pump-probe imaging. of the pump pulse, and then shifted to the position of YS, where YS = D + YF(E), illustrated in Fig. 2(a). We used the D to indicate the relative positions between pump focuses and sample surface, and the focal position of pump was shifted deeper into the sample as D increased. In addition, the theoretical beam diameter was 5.7 µm when the pump pulse was focused on the sample surface (D = 0 µm) using the objective lens OL1 (NA = 0.26). When D were 30 µm and 60 µm, the calculated diameters on the sample surface were 21.86 µm and 38.01 µm, respectively. Therefore, the laser fluences on the sample surface with different pump energy and D were 274.32 J/cm2 (70 µJ-0 µm), 18.65 J/cm2 (70 µJ-30 µm), 6.17 J/cm2 (70 µJ-60 µm), 195.94 J/cm2 (50 µJ-0 µm), 13.32 J/cm2 (50 µJ-30 µm), 4.41 J/cm2 (50 µJ-60 µm), 117.57 J/cm2 (30 µJ-0 µm), 7.99 J/cm2 (30 µJ-30 µm), 2.64 J/cm2 (30 µJ-60 µm). The delay time for pump-probe imaging was determined by the difference of optical path lengths (OPLs) between pump and probe pulses, and the difference was changed by moving the delay line. The position of delay line at which the OPLs of pump and probe pulses were the same was defined as the zero-delay position. The probe pulse propagated a distance in the sample before arriving at the plasma because of the sample thickness, and thus, its OPL depended on the refractive index of materials. The OPL of pump pulse was changed by the variation of relative position D, and D was related to the pump energy E. Therefore, the zero-delay position was a function of material, pump energy and relative position, expressed as X0(M, E, D), where M was the material. The reference zero-delay position was determined in sapphire (Sa) when the

[PAGE 4] Research Article Vol. 30, No. 4 / 14 Feb 2022 / Optics Express 4957 filament was very weak and short at E = 70 µJ and D = 0 µm, which was expressed using X0(Sa, 70 µJ, 0 µm), as illustrated in Fig. 2(c). The zero-delay positions in other experimental conditions were obtained by calculating the delay change compared to the reference zero delay. Based on the zero-delay position, the delay time of imaging was ∆t = 2[X0(M, E, D) - X]/c when the delay line was at the position of X, where c is the light speed. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Dependence on materials Images with and without pump beams were recorded in each experiment, and the background noise was eliminated by calculating the ratio between the two images. The results of filaments in sapphire and silica glass are shown in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. The pump energy was 50 µJ, and the relative position was D = 60 µm. The interface between the air and the sample was defined as Z = 0 µm. In sapphire, the filament gradually grew along the Z direction from 480 fs to 2.28 ps, and then remained stable from 2.28 to 5.48 ps before slowly decaying from 5.48 ps and disappearing after 72.48 ps. Finally, shock wave propagation was observed from 72.48 ps. In silica glass, the filament grew along the Z direction from 480 fs to 1.48 ps, and then entered the stable state from 2.28 ps. At this point, the filament became bright. Shock waves were observed from 72.48 ps. The lifetime of the filament was 72 ps in sapphire and at least 972 ps in silica glass. Fig. 3. Filament evolution in sapphire with a pump energy of 50 µJ and a relative position D = 60 µm. The red arrow indicates the laser incidence. The dotted line denotes the interface between the air and the sample. The black shadow in the filaments represents probe beam depletion caused by the inverse Bremmstrahlung absorption of free electrons in the conduction band [19]. The plasma density is proportional to the absorption coefficient of the probe beam [16]. The absorption can be described as dIt/dx = −αIt, (1) where It is the intensity of the probe beam passing through the central part of the filament, α is the absorption coefficient, and x is the width of the filament in the direction of probe beam

[PAGE 5] Research Article Vol. 30, No. 4 / 14 Feb 2022 / Optics Express 4958 Fig. 4. Filament evolution in silica glass with a pump energy of 50 µJ and a relative position D = 60 µm. The red arrow indicates the laser incidence. The dotted line denotes the interface between the air and the sample. propagation. The average absorption coefficient is calculated as follows: αaver = −ln(I1/I0)/d, (2) where I0 and I1 are the intensities of the probe beam before and after the filament, respectively, and d is the average width of the filament. The absorption results are shown in Figs. 5 and 6, which reflect the dynamics of the plasma. The Z = 0 µm position is the interface between the air and the sample, and the fluctuation of absorption near the interface from 72.48 to 972.48 ps was attributed to shock waves and the removal of material. Fig. 5. Transient average absorption coefficient of the probe beam in sapphire at different delay times with a pump energy of 50 µJ and a relative position D = 60 µm. The absorption coefficients abruptly increased at 480 fs for sapphire and silica glass. This indicates that the plasma in the two materials was excited after almost the same time delay of approximately 480 fs. Moreover, the results show that the plasma density in sapphire was smaller than that in silica glass from 480 to 680 fs. The plasma formation mechanisms in dielectrics can

[PAGE 6] Research Article Vol. 30, No. 4 / 14 Feb 2022 / Optics Express 4959 Fig. 6. Transient average absorption coefficient of the probe beam in silica glass at different delay times with a pump energy of 50 µJ and a relative position D = 60 µm. be described using the rate equation [22–24] ∂ρ ∂t = σIk + αcIρ −ηrecρ2 −ηdiff ρ, (3) where ρ is the free electron density, t is time, I is the laser intensity, k is the photon number of multiphoton absorption, σ and αc are the multiphoton ionization and cascade ionization coefficients, respectively, and ηrec and ηdiff are the recombination and diffusion coefficients, respectively. The linear refractive indexes of sapphire and silica glass are 1.76 and 1.46, respectively, and the band gaps of sapphire and silica glass are 9.9 eV and 9 eV, respectively. At the beginning of plasma formation, ionization dominates free electron density changes, and recombination and diffusion can be ignored. The calculated excitation of electrons in sapphire is approximately 32% of that in silica glass at the time corresponding to the rising half maximum of the pump pulse; this is consistent with the experimental results. With the propagation of a pump pulse, the excited plasma in the filaments achieved peak density. The saturation speed of the plasma in the two materials is different. The plasma in the sapphire filament saturated at approximately 1.48 ps; thus, the growth time was 1 ps. However, the plasma in the silica glass filament reached its maximum density state at approximately 680 fs; thus, the growth time was 200 fs. As the free electrons relaxed, the probe beam gradually recovered its intensity and the absorption coefficient decreased. In sapphire, the density of the free electrons decreased from approximately 1.48 ps to approximately 72.48 ps. The decay process lasted for 71 ps, which is similar to previous research, where the lifetime was found to be 100 ps with an uncertainty of the order of 10% [25]. In silica glass, the density of free electrons decreased from 680 fs to approximately 1.48 ps, despite the filament’s continued growth along the Z direction from 680 fs to 1.48 ps. The rapid decay of the free electrons lasted for 800 fs. Finally, the filament became stable in terms of electron density and length from 2.28 to 972.48 ps. The ultrafast plasma relaxation phenomenon in silica glass may be attributed to self-trapped excitons (STEs) [26,27]. Owing to the intense interaction between the excited electrons and the lattice, the electron–hole pairs are rapidly trapped as a result of lattice distortion [28]. In previous studies, the trapping time ranged from 50 to 220 fs [18,29–31], and the rapid reduction of free electrons between 680 fs and 1.48 ps observed in this experiment is in agreement with these reported trapping processes. The high filament stability from 2.28 to 972.48 ps after trapping is due to the long lifetime of STEs [32,33].