[PAGE 1] Optics Communications 555 (2024) 130224 Available online 25 December 2023 0030-4018/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Ultrafast laser composite cutting ultra-thin glass Yuhang Luo a, Xiaozhu Xie a,b,c,*, Zucheng Zhang a, Zhaoyan Li a, Yajun Huang a a Laser Micro/Nano Processing Lab, School of Electromechanical Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China b State Key Laboratory of Precision Electronic Manufacturing Technology and Equipment, School of Electromechanical Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 51006, China c Department of Experiment Teaching, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Ultra-thin glass Laser composite cutting Internal modification Surface scribing A B S T R A C T Due to its excellent chemical stability, and scratch resistance, ultra-thin glass (less than 1 mm) has been widely used in the consumer electronics and photovoltaic industries. To meet the requirements of high-quality ultra-thin glass cutting, the composite cutting of ultra-thin glass based on ultrafast laser is proposed which consists of laser internal modification and surface scribing. The effects of laser pulse duration, laser pulse energy, and pulse separation rate on the laser internal modified region of ultrathin glass are studied. The cut quality of the samples under two surface groove structures is compared. The maximum edge strength of 369.07 MPa and the minimum cross-section roughness of 0.148 μm are obtained by laser composite cutting with the stamp-hole-type groove structure. 1. Introduction Ultra-thin glass (less than 1 mm) has been widely adopted in the optoelectronics, fiber optics, display and photovoltaic industries due to its excellent high light transmission, chemical stability and scratch resistance [1–3], which is an important component of various electronic products, such as cell phones, tablet PCs, and image sensors. In the manufacturing of such products, ultra-thin glass needs to be precision cut, drilled, grooved and surface structured, etc. Edge strength and roughness of the cutting section is an important criterion to ensure the quality of glass cutting. In the traditional me­ chanical processing [4], diamond grinding wheels are usually applied to cut glass. The glass surface is marked and scribed by a diamond tip, and then the glass is separated by a splitting machine. Although mechanical processing approaches [5,6] ever improve the surface finish of the glass cutting surface, there are still many problems in conventional mechan­ ical processing, such as wide grooves, easy chipping, high material loss and high cross-section roughness. It has even been reported that the average strength of cut glass is reduced to 60 % of its original strength by mechanical processing [7–9]. In recent years, laser processing has become an important method of glass cutting due to its non-contact processing, no tool wear, and high- energy density. The laser beam can be focused to a micron-sized spot, with minimal damage to the workpiece. The commonly used laser cut­ ting method is laser surface scribing [10,11]. However, owing to the elevated high ablation threshold of the glass, the removal rate under a single scan is limited. Through cutting requires multiple repeated scanning, which results in the reduced glass strength, high cross-section roughness and poor cutting efficiency. Stealth dicing can solve the problems along with conventional laser cutting [12,13]. Shin et al. [14] enhanced the edge strength of ultrathin glass by using a bottom-up multi-pass cutting method. Because of the limitation of the objective lens depth of focus and other factors, the glass needs to be cut several times, resulting in poor quality of the cut surface. Ahmed [15] et al. reported the filament cutting of glass plates by using a 780 nm fs laser, which improved the reliability of glass cutting along the filament path. Filament-forming arrays are machined on the front and back surfaces of the glass, and then the glass is separated by mechanical external forces. Bessel light-based stealth dicing method [16,17] has been popular employed recently. Shin et al. [18] utilized an ultrafast Bessel laser to cut ultrathin glass and obtained excellent separation and edge strength. Liao [19] et al. used the bessel beams to cut glass with a thickness of 500 μm. The effect of the laser source divergence distance on the roughness of the glass section was studied. In the optimum combination of full * Corresponding author. Laser Micro/Nano Processing Lab, School of Electromechanical Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China. E-mail addresses: 1023338305@qq.com (Y. Luo), xiaozhuxie@gdut.edu.cn (X. Xie), 824534619@qq.com (Z. Zhang), 1033848385@qq.com (Z. Li), 604616986@ qq.com (Y. Huang). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics Communications journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optcom https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optcom.2023.130224 Received 16 October 2023; Received in revised form 27 November 2023; Accepted 11 December 2023

[PAGE 2] Optics Communications 555 (2024) 130224 2 ablation cutting parameters, the minimum cross-sectional roughness is 355 nm. Stealth dicing can effectively reduce thermal effects and debris so as to obtain a higher edge strength, but it still suffers from the problems of difficult control of the laser modified region and poor quality of the cutting section. In this paper, a composite cutting of ultra-thin glass based on ultra­ fast laser is proposed. The effects of laser pulse duration, laser pulse energy, and pulse separation rate on the internal modification of glass are studied. The formation rules of the modified layer under different laser parameters are analyzed. The quality of the cut samples is compared between the two different surface grooves. The optimal parameter combinations are obtained based on the edge strength and roughness, and the high-quality cutting of 300 μm alkali-free borosili­ cate glass is realized. 2. Materials and methods The alkali-free borosilicate glass substrate (Eagle®XG) with dimension of 75 mm × 25 mm × 300 μm (length × width × thickness) was used in the experiment, and the glass was wiped with a dust-free cloth after ultrasonic cleaning in ethanol. A schematic of the experimental setup was shown in Fig. 1a. This experiment was performed using a configuration that included a PHAROS-type solid-state laser (laser pulse duration in the range of 290 fs~15 ps, λ = 1030 nm). A 50x microscope objective (NA = 0.67) was used to focus the beam with focus spot diameter of 2 μm. The CCD light source was coaxially aligned with the laser beam by means of a reflector and a dichroic mirror to determine the position of the laser focus. The glass sample was placed on a moving stage using a fixture with a gap support. The position of the sample was controlled using a 3D trans­ lation stage (Aerotech ANT130) with a resolution of 75 nm. Laser composite processing included laser internal modification and surface scribing. The laser was focused at 150 μm below the glass surface by the 3-D translation stage. Firstly, laser internal modification was performed inside the glass (step 1). Then the laser focus was moved to the glass surface for surface scribing (step 2). All the experiments were Fig. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of ultrafast laser processing system, (b) processing method and (c) three-point force measurement. Y. Luo et al.

[PAGE 3] Optics Communications 555 (2024) 130224 3 kept constant at 1 kHz pulse repetition rate. After laser processing, the samples were separated by mechanical bending using a three-point bender (shown in Fig. 1c), and measurements of splitting force and edge strength were recorded simultaneously. The morphology of cross- section was observed by optical microscopy (OM, CX40 M) and scan­ ning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi SU8220). The roughness was performed using a 3D laser microscope (Olympus OLS4100). In the three-point bending test, a loading indenter with a radius of 3 mm was moved downward at a speed of 100 μm/s. The span between the two supporting fixtures was L = 15 mm. The strength was calculated according to the three-point bending strength formula: σ = (3P • L)/ (2b • H2), where σ is the three-point bending strength (MPa), P is the breaking load (N), L is the lower span (mm), b is the glass width, and H is the glass thickness (mm). 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Laser internal modification Recently, it has been found in the studies of internal modification of transparent materials that phase distortion of the laser is caused when the pulse duration is too short because of the Kerr effect. When the laser induced internal modification of the glass, the nonlinear effects are strong due to the shielding and scattering effects of the plasma. The beam intensity is weakened because of the nonlinear effects and the laser internal modifications fail to obtain the complete tear-drop structure. The linear scanning is performed inside the glass with different pulse durations, where the laser single pulse energy (E) is 22.56 μJ and the scanning speed (v) is 5 mm/s. Fig. 2a–b illustrate the relationship be­ tween the height and width of the laser modified region at different pulse durations. The length of the laser modified region increases from 40.39 μm to 142.43 μm and the width of the laser modified region in­ creases from 5.49 μm to 19.73 μm with the increase of pulse duration at E = 22.56 μJ. When the pulse duration is in the range of 290 fs~1 ps, the nonlinear effect of the laser is obvious, which reduces the absorption rate of laser in glass, and makes it difficult to form the modified layer. Moreover, when increasing the pulse duration at this pulse energy, avalanche ionization is observed in the modified layer inside the glass. At the pulse duration of τ = 15 ps, notable changes occur: long cracks evident in the lower portion of the laser modified region (Fig. 3c) and substantial increase in the height of the laser modified region. Further­ more, according to Fig. 2a, the height of the laser modified region is significantly increased with the increase of the laser pulse energy. Fig. 3 displays the cross-section morphology of the laser internal modified region at E = 22.56 μJ under different pulse durations. The microcracks are present at the top of the laser modified region at all pulse durations, which gradually increase with the increase of pulse duration. When the pulse duration τ = 5 ps, a bulge-like morphology is observed in the laser modified region. At τ = 10 ps, a continuous fila­ mentary structure occurs in the laser modified region. At τ = 15 ps, there are traces of material melting and reconsolidation in the laser modified region, and a downward expanding long splitting is formed, which plays a beneficial role in facilitating the subsequent fracture of the glass. To explore the effect of different laser energies on the modified layer, SEM images of the cross-section after a single pulse irradiated are compared and analyzed (Fig. 4). As reported in previous studies, the laser modified region has a teardrop shape [27]. When the laser energy is low (E = 7.52 μJ), the middle and rear parts of the laser modified region are not formed into a teardrop shape and the edges of the laser modified region are curved and discontinuous. This is due to the fact that the back end of the laser modified region absorbs a tiny amount of energy, which is weakened when the laser passes downwards When the energy parameter is set at E = 22.56 μJ, the laser modified region ex­ hibits increased size. The boundaries of the laser internal modified re­ gion become clearly defined, and no collapse is observed at the edges. As the laser energy continuing to increase, the edge of laser modified region becomes collapsed, as shown in Fig. 4d–e. Therefore, strong pressure generated inside the glass by high laser energy induces the random cracks, and the teardrop structure of the modified layer is distinct when the laser energy is 22.56 μJ. To analyze the effect of pulse separation rate on the modification area, the glass cross section is examined by electron microscopy. The pulse separation rate of the laser is given by p = v/(D ⋅f), where v is the scanning speed, D is the spot diameter, and f is the pulse repetition rate. The scanning speed of 5 mm/s, 9 mm/s, 13 mm/s, 17 mm/s, and 21 mm/s is corresponding to the pulse separation rate of 2.5, 4.5, 6.5, 8.5, and 10.5, respectively. Fig. 5 shows the morphology of the laser modi­ fied regions inside the glass at different pulse separation rates. When the separation rate is low (p = 4.5), the structure of the teardrop shape in the laser modified region is indistinct, with the presence of irregular lumps and disorganized cracks. As the pulse separation rate continues to rise, the teardrop-shaped structure of the laser modified region gradually becomes distinct at p = 8.5, and the width and height of the laser modified region are basically constant at p = 10.5. In addition, multiple laser pulses can overlap multiple laser modified regions when the pulse separation rate is low, which can result in voids at the centers of the laser modified regions. To sum up, the laser modified region at 15 ps?has a distinct boundary Fig. 2. The (a) height and (b) width of the modified layer vary with energy under different pulse durations. Y. Luo et al.

[PAGE 4] Optics Communications 555 (2024) 130224 4 and a large area. The height of the modification area can be increased by increasing the laser energy, but at 30.08 μJ, the edge collapse is present in the laser modified region. When the pulse separation rate is higher than p = 8.5, the laser modified region is pronounced and the change of height is minimal. 3.2. Laser surface scribing of stress-release grooves Due to the short Rayleigh length of the Gaussian beam, the amount of material removed in a single scan is very limited, so that multiple scans are required for the full cutting. Owing to multiple scans, a corrugated structure is induced in the cross-section of the glass samples, which causes a relatively large roughness in the cut section [27]. To reduce the roughness, a stress-release grooves can be scribed on the upper surface of the glass, which allows the cracks in the laser internal modified region to expand vertically during the mechanical splitting process. By varying the pulse separation rate, two types of grooves can be obtained (Fig. 6). The V-shaped grooves are formed by laser scribing under a low pulse separation rate and the stamp-hole-type groove con­ sisting of multiple single-pulse grooves with some spacing under high pulse separation rate is a line-groove structure. Based on Collins [25] et al., the stamp hole structure formed by an ultrashort laser source can result in a stress concentration factor that can be up to tens of orders of magnitude higher than before. Fig. 3. Correspond to (a–c) SEM image of glass cross sections at E = 22.56 μJ and different pulse duration and (a1-c1) the local magnified images. Fig. 4. When the pulse duration τ = 15 ps, (a1-e1) the electron microscope images of the morphology of the surface with different energy laser modified regions and (a2-e4) the magnified images. Y. Luo et al.

[PAGE 5] Optics Communications 555 (2024) 130224 5 To compare the groove of these two structures, the cut surface is examined in detail by SEM (Fig. 7). At τ = 15 ps and p = 12.5, the stamp- hole-type structure can be clearly seen on the upper surface. The thermal effect is accumulating due to the long pulse duration. The inside of each hole is filled with melting traces. Decreasing the pulse duration and separation rate to τ = 290 fs and p = 4, the stamp hole-type structure on the upper surface is not as obvious as that at τ = 15 ps? Periodic pore structures can be obtained in the upper part of the cross-section (Fig. 7b). Streak-like structures appear in the middle part of the cross- section with voids possibly interspersed among these. When the laser parameters are τ = 15 ps, p = 0.9 and τ = 290 fs, p = 0.9, the surface structure is a V-shaped groove (Fig. 7c–d). There are cluster-like struc­ tures in the cross-section of V-shaped grooves because of the continuous vaporization of the glass material and the generation of plasma during the laser scribing process. The cluster-like structure in the figure is formed by the continuous aggregation of the ejected particles. Comparing these two parameters it is obvious that the surface grooves produced at 15 ps are deeper than those produced at 290 fs? In conclusion, under femtosecond pulse duration, the stamp-hole-type grooves with smooth cross-section, regular shape, and low ablation are obtained. 3.3. Quality assessment of laser composite cuts To assess the cut quality of the samples after laser composite cutting, the upper surface, cross-section, and front and back edges of the samples were observed by OM. Fig. 8 shows the laser composite cutting samples with V-shaped groove structure and stamp-hole-type groove structure. As seen in Fig. 8a1-d1, there is obvious ablation damage on the surface morphology at 15 ps and a few cracks on the groove edges. When the pulse duration is 290 fs, the ablation damage on the surface is signifi­ cantly reduced with a flat edge. After mechanical splitting, the cross sections (Fig. 8a2-d2) and the edge morphology (Fig. 8a3-d4) can be observed under each parameter. In contrast to the V-groove sample, the Fig. 5. Correspond to (a1-e1) the SEM of the morphology of the laser modified regions with different separation rate and (a2-e4) the magnified images. Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of laser surface scribing (a) V-shaped groove and (b) stamp-hole-shape groove. Y. Luo et al.

[PAGE 6] Optics Communications 555 (2024) 130224 6 Fig. 7. SEM topography of surface cut structures: (a–b) stamp hole groove (c–d) V-shaped groove. Fig. 8. Optical microscope image of morphology of (a) upper surface and (b) cross-section of different composite structures and (c) front-side and (d) back-side edge of the glass after splitting. Y. Luo et al.