[PAGE 1] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 1176–1187 Available online 11 July 2023 1526-6125/© 2023 The Society of Manufacturing Engineers. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Nanosecond laser-induced filamentous modification in silicate glasses Xinhu Fan, Guojun Zhang, Yu Huang, Congyi Wu, Youmin Rong * State Key Lab of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China School of Mechanical Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Laser-induced moving breakdown Transparent glasses Filamentous damage Stealth cutting micro-explosion A B S T R A C T Laser-induced filamentous modification (LIFM) has been extensively studied in transparent materials and is widely used for cutting and drilling with a high aspect ratio. However, the discussion focuses on the domain of ultra-short pulses recently, such as picosecond and femtosecond pulses. In this work, a LIFM by a short pulse in silicate glasses is demonstrated, and the physical mechanism is investigated. In the soda-lime glass, a filamentous modification with a length of >650 μm was introduced by a nanosecond pulse with an energy of 0.86 mJ. The average length of LIFM is positively correlated with the pulse energy but is not affected by the focus depth significantly. Furthermore, LIFM is also observed in borosilicate glass and K9 glass, but not in fused silica glass. Theoretical analysis shows that the contribution of the self-focusing and optical error to LIMB could be ignored in soda-lime glass. An improved Laser-induced moving breakdown (LIMB) model is proposed to describe LIFM by a nanosecond pulse, and the thermal explosion (TE) model is used to explain the micro-structures. High-density defects dominate the LIMB of nanosecond pulses in silicate glasses, which provide seed electrons for laser- induced ionization and induce a thermal explosion through enhanced absorption. The estimation result of the TE model shows that the final temperature of thermal plasma exceeds 1 × 105 K, resulting in micro-explosion and forming micro-voids and micro-crack clusters. Based on the principle of LIFM, stealth cutting was implemented by a high-frequency nanosecond laser in soda-lime glass with a thickness of 2 mm, and the cutting speed reaches 3000 mm/s. 1. Introduction Laser-induced filamentous modification in glasses is interesting because this modification promotes the capability and efficiency of cutting and drilling significantly. Some impressive works have been conducted on high aspect ratio micro-nano channel machining and single-pass separation of thick glasses [1–4]. The key to LIFM lies in creating an elongated energy deposition area, which is influenced by the beam mode, optical focusing conditions, pulse characteristics, and ma­ terial properties. The initial energy distribution area of the focus spot is affected by the beam mode. The focus spot of a Gaussian beam is typically considered to be a point, whereas Bessel beams exhibit an elongated and uniform light field in the axial direction [5–8]. Jesus et al. [9] propose a method for high aspect ratio nano-channel fabrication in glass using ultrafast Bessel pulses, and the aspect ratios of nano-channel reach over 100:1. Feuer et al. [3] separated soda lime glass with a thickness of 8 mm by a mil­ lijoule picosecond pulsed Gaussian-Bessel beam within a single pass. Liu et al. [10] demonstrate linear and curvilinear cleaving single-crystal sapphire without debris or taper through an ultrafast laser Bessel beam. Ultrafast laser Bessel beam is widely used for cutting glass and improves the efficiency and quality because of LIFM. The influence of focusing conditions on energy deposition needs to be considered. When a Gaussian beam is focused by high numerical aperture objectives, the energy distribution expands along the optical axis due to spherical aberration [11]. If the focusing position is inside the glass, the glass surface becomes part of the combined optical system, leading to aberrations. The longitudinal spherical aberration increases with higher input aperture angles or deeper focus depths within the glass [12,13]. However, for lenses with a low numerical aperture, the aber­ ration has minimal impact on the elongation of the initial energy deposition area. Ultra-short pulses with high peak power and Gaussian mode could trigger self-focusing in transparent media due to the power-dependent nonlinear refraction effect. Self-focusing prolongs the area of energy deposition and modification dynamically. Sudrie et al. [14] proposed a * Corresponding author at: State Key Lab of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. E-mail address: rym@hust.edu.cn (Y. Rong). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Manufacturing Processes journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/manpro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.07.006 Received 14 March 2023; Received in revised form 18 May 2023; Accepted 2 July 2023

[PAGE 2] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 1176–1187 1177 femtosecond pulse filament propagation and damage model in fused silica and considered the critical power and plasma density of self- focusing. The self-focusing effect is also affected by the focusing con­ ditions. In the case of tightly focused laser pulses interacting with glass, optical breakdown occurs before self-focusing [15]. Nguyen et al. [16] investigated the competition between optical breakdown and laser- induced filamentation in fused silica. The results demonstrate that breakdown precedes filamentation for tight focusing, while for longer focal lengths, filamentation takes place at lower power levels. The laser- induced breakdown has been studied in the interaction between focused nanosecond pulses and glass materials [17–19], but the contribution of self-focusing needs further investigation. The properties of glasses have an impact on the energy distribution and the modification during the laser-material interaction process. The energy distribution depends on the focusing and aberration, which is related to linear refractive index and nonlinear refractive index. In addition, some reports indicate that the final modification structure induced by nanosecond pulses with Gaussian mode varies across different types of glasses. In fused quartz glass, the length of the modi­ fied region is approximately equal to the Rayleigh length [20,21]. However, in soda-lime glass, the length of the optical breakdown region produced by a focused spot with a Rayleigh length of 7.2 μm exceeds 100 μm [17]. Hsuan-Ya et al. [22] analyzed the extended internal modification in Schott B270 and soda lime glasses irradiated by nano­ second laser pulses. Moreover, Han et al. [23] observed an elongated modification in K9 glass that extended beyond the Rayleigh length. They utilized the laser-induced moving breakdown model (LIMB) to describe the process of damage formation. Impurities and defects in various glasses affect the optical properties of glasses, resulting in great changes in the absorption of laser energy [24]. The nonlinear absorption of de­ fects and impurities could contribute to the dynamic development of optical breakdown by nanosecond pulses, resulting in the formation of LIFM. The technology of LIFM can be employed for the processing of high aspect ratio features in transparent glasses. Recently, relevant reports primarily focus on the field of ultrafast lasers. Mishchik et al. [25] improved laser glass cutting by employing the spatio-temporal control of energy deposition using bursts of femtosecond pulses. With a pulse repetition rate of 10 kHz, the cutting speed achieved is 125 mm/s, resulting in an average roughness reduced to 500 nm for thin glass. Liao et al. [26] reported a high-quality full ablation cutting processing of silica glass using a picosecond laser Bessel beam with burst mode. The maximum cutting speed is 400 mm/s and the minimum roughness of the cross-section is 355 nm. Chen et al. [27] proposed a composite laser beam separation technology for cutting soda lime glass with a thickness of 1 mm. Although the surface roughness is <120 nm, the separation speed of the glass is limited to 12 mm/s. In short, the efficiency of glass cutting by LIFM using ultrafast laser is relatively low due to the limi­ tations associated with pulse spacing and laser frequency. Compared to the well-established application of ultrashort pulse laser-induced fila­ mentation modification, nanosecond laser-induced filamentation is still in the exploratory stage. However, nanosecond lasers have more ad­ vantages in the range of single pulse modification, which may be beneficial for improving efficiency. In this paper, laser-induced filamentous modification is generated in the bulk of silicate glasses by focused nanosecond pulses, such as soda- lime glass, borosilicate glass, and K9 glass. The study focuses on the filamentary modification in soda-lime glass emphatically. The effects of pulse energy and focus depth on the length of LIFM are studied. The microstructure and phase transformations of the modified region are analyzed. The theoretical methods are employed to discuss the contri­ bution of self-focusing and aberration to the initial energy disposition. By considering the nonlinear absorption of defects and impurities, the laser-induced moving breakdown (LIMB) model is improved to reveal the physical mechanism of LIFM in silicate glasses. Additionally, the TE model is introduced to explain the formation of microstructure during the moving breakdown process. Finally, a high-frequency nanosecond laser is utilized for the stealth cutting of soda-lime glass. 2. Experimental section 2.1. Experimental setup The experimental setup for beam focusing is illuminated schemati­ cally in Fig. 1(a). Nanosecond pulses were emitted by an Nd: YAG laser with a center wavelength of 532 nm and a pulse width of 15 ns. A dy­ namic focusing galvano-scanner (2.5D) was employed to control the speed and position of the laser beam. A telecentric field lens with a focal length of 100 mm was used to converge the laser beam. Specific pa­ rameters of the laser, beam expander, galvano-scanner, and field lens are provided in Table 1. 2.2. Methods Laser beam was focused inside the glass and then scanned along a straight line to create a modification. The fast scanning speed (≥3000 mm/s) ensured that the energy deposition areas of each pulse did not overlap, allowing for the observation of the modification caused by a single pulse. In the cleaving experiment, the mechanical force was applied to the modified area using a three-point bending setup, as depicted in Fig. 1(b). Following the separation of the glass, the cross- section of the separated surface was carefully observed and character­ ized in detail, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). 2.3. Materials The experimental materials used in this study are highly transparent glasses, such as soda lime glass, borosilicate glass, K9 glass, and fused silica glass. Unless otherwise specified, soda lime glass is the chosen experimental material in this paper. The thickness of the samples used for single-pulse modification experiments is 2 mm and 10 mm. As shown in Table 2, the optical properties of four kinds of glass are listed. Each kind of glass has a high optical transmittance at 532 nm and cannot be excited by a single photon due to the wide conduction band. To observe the full picture of the filamentous modification, some small pieces containing the modification were cut out and the sides were polished. The material of the stealth cutting experiment is soda-lime glass, and the size of the specimen is 120 mm × 40 mm × 2 mm. 2.4. Characterization An optical microscope (OMT-3RT, OUMIT) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM, SU3900, HITACHI) were used for the modification region observation. A Raman spectrometer (LabRAM HR800, Horiba JobinYvon) was employed to analyze the phase transformation of the modified area. A laser scanning confocal microscope (LSCM, VK-X200K, KEYENCE) was utilized to observe the three-dimensional morphology of the cross-section. 3. Results 3.1. The laser-induced filamentous modification in silicate glasses Four types of transparent glasses were used in the experiment of nanosecond pulse-induced modification. As shown in Table 2, all four glasses have high transmittance at the wavelength of laser emission (532 nm). The focus spot is positioned inside the glass, initiating the modification process from that point. The pulse energy is 0.86 mJ, and the glass thickness is 2 mm. The pulse frequency is 40 kHz, and the scanning speed is 6000 mm/s. Optical images of modification viewed from the side are presented in Fig. 2. The laser pulse-induced modifi­ cations appear filamentous in soda lime glass, borosilicate glass, and K9 X. Fan et al.

[PAGE 3] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 1176–1187 1178 glass. In these silicate glasses, the axial length of the modification rea­ ches hundreds of microns. However, in fused silica glass, the axial length of the modification region is short, measuring <50 μm. Within the modified area of silicate glasses, discrete micro-voids and micro-crack clusters are distributed along the axial direction. In the case of fused silica glass, only a micropore and one crack cluster are observed in a pulse-induced modification area. In the next section, the micro- structures of LIFM in silicate glasses are analyzed in detail. 3.2. Influence of pulse energy and focus depth on LIFM in soda-lime glass Soda-lime glass has been chosen to investigate the impact of pulse energy and focus depth on LIFM. Modifications with different pulse energies are depicted in Fig. 3. For pulse energies of 0.86 mJ, 0.63 mJ, and 0.47 mJ, the average axial lengths of the modifications are measured to be 694.99 μm, 589.68 μm, and 451.16 μm, respectively. The morphology of the modifications exhibits common characteristics. The modification region takes on an acicular shape and comprises two distinct substructures: strings of micro-voids distributed along the axis and surrounding micro-crack clusters. The length of LIFM, the size of micro-voids, and the width of micro-cracks are all positively correlated with pulse energy. In each modification, the transverse dimension of the microstructure decreases along the direction of the incident pulse. The energy distribution is elongated due to aberrations from the modified glass surface, and this elongation demonstrates a positive correlation with the focus depth. Consequently, we conducted mea­ surements and recorded the length of LIFM at various focus depths. The pulse energy is 0.86 mJ, and the focus depth is −1 mm to −9 mm. The pulsed frequency is 40 kHz and the scanning speed is 6000 mm/s. Fig. 4 (a) shows the side view optical image of modifications at different focus planes. The modification area formed by each pulse can be distinguished easily. The highlighted modification in each layer is due to the image superposition of multiple modifications in the vertical direction. The statistical results of the modified length of each focus depth are shown in Fig. 4(b). The average length of modifications both exceeds 650 μm. Notably, the length of LIFM increases and then decreases slightly with the increase of focus depth, which may be attributed to the combined influence of aberration and energy loss. The influence of focus depth on LIFM is not obvious in soda-lime glass. In the case of soda-lime glass, the influence of focus depth on LIFM is inconspicuous. 3.3. Micro-structures of LIFM in soda-lime glass The laser-induced filamentous modification in silicate glasses ex­ hibits similarities, and representative microstructures in soda-lime glass are illustrated in Fig. 5. The overall morphology of the filamentous modification is needle-like, with the needle tip pointing in the same Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the experimental setup, (a) focused nanosecond laser scans inside glass to generate modification, (b) apply mechanical force along the scan path, (c) parallel modifications formed by pulses of rapid scanning (side view of the red circle in panel (b)). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Table 1 Parameters of experimental devices. Devices Parameters Laser (RFH, Excellent-III-35) Pulse energy (mJ): 0.47–0.86 Beam quality (M2): <1.2 Beam diameter (mm): 2 Beam expander Magnification: 2 Galvano-scanner (RAYLASE, Germany) Magnification of dynamic focus: 2.7 Scanning speed (mm/s): 0.1–6000 Field lens Focus length (mm): 100 Entrance pupil (mm): 12 Numerical aperture (NA): 0.06 Nominal waist of spot size: 3.4 μm Table 2 Material properties of experimental glasses. Glass Linear refractive index (n0) Nonlinear refractive index (n2) Transparency Band gap References Soda-lime glass 1.53 10 × 10−16 cm2/W 345–2500 nm 3.5 eV [24] Borosilicate glass 1.47 – 330–2500 nm 4.4 eV [24] K9 glass 1.52 3 × 10−16 cm2/W 370–2500 nm 4.28 eV [23] Fused silica 1.45 3.5 × 10−16 cm2/W 200–3500 nm 9 eV [28] X. Fan et al.

[PAGE 4] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 1176–1187 1179 direction as the beam incidence. The distinguishable micro-crack clus­ ters are marked with numbers and are represented by the red short- dotted line in Fig. 5(a). Along the opposite direction of laser beam incidence, the size of the crack cluster increases slowly and then de­ creases sharply, that is, from No. 1 to No. 11. Among them, the No. 9 crack cluster exhibits the largest size. The micro-voids are located on the central axis of filamentous modification and are surrounded by micro-crack clusters. SEM images of micro-voids on the surface cleaved along the axial are shown in Fig. 5 (b)–(e). The micro-voids exhibit various shapes, including spherical, ellipsoidal, and cylindrical, with smooth inner walls. At the tip of fila­ mentous modification, the micro-voids are predominantly spherical, as depicted in Fig. 5(e). Along the opposite direction of the beam incidence, the axial size of the micro-voids gradually lengthens, transitioning from ellipsoidal to cylindrical, and eventually becoming elongated cylinders, as illustrated in Fig. 5(d)–(b). The diameter and length of the micro- voids also slowly increase and then rapidly decrease along the oppo­ site direction of laser beam incidence. The evolution law of micropores and microcracks is consistent. Microstructure and phase transformation analysis of the irradiated regions and pristine material was conducted using Raman spectroscopy. The Raman excitation wavelength is 532 nm, the spot size is 1.3 μm, the spatial resolution of XY direction is lower than 1 μm, and the irradiation power is 50 mW. Raman spectrum peaks of the pristine glass are located at 470 cm−1, 550 cm−1, 770 cm−1, 950 cm−1, and 1090 cm−1, as shown by green spectral line (point C in the insert SEM image) in Fig. 6. Points A and B correspond to the micro-void shell of laser irradiation center and the micro-crack of the irradiation edge, respectively. Following the pulse irradiance, the intensity of the 470 cm−1 band in the Raman spectrum increased, and the intensity of 550 cm−1, 770 cm−1, 950 cm−1, and 1090 cm−1 bands decreased. The shift of the Raman peak to low fre­ quency is attributed to the densification caused by material compression [17]. The densification degree of the irradiation center and edge is different. Compared with the intensity of the spectral peak at point B, the intensity of 550 cm−1 and 1090 cm−1 bands decreases more at point A. At the spectral peak of 470 cm−1, the peak width of the irradiation area narrows, and peak differentiation is found in the spectral line of point A, from a magnified image of 450–510 cm−1 in Fig. 6. It indicates that the central modification area has a higher degree of densification and crystallization trend. 4. Discussion 4.1. Energy deposition of focused Gaussian pulse in soda-lime glass The laser-induced modification is dependent on the energy Fig. 2. Nanosecond pulse-induced filamentous modification in four glasses, (a) soda-lime glass, (b) borosilicate glass, (c) K9 glass, (d) fused silica glass. Fig. 3. Optical microscope images of LIFM by single nanosecond pulse with different pulse energy in soda-lime glass. X. Fan et al.

[PAGE 5] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 1176–1187 1180 deposition, which is influenced by pulse characteristics, focus condi­ tions, and material properties. The energy of the focused Gaussian pulse is concentrated in the spot that follows the Gaussian distribution invariably. Since soda lime glass is transparent at 532 nm, the incident beam only propagates until the focus region. The absorption of laser pulse energy takes place within the focusing range. However, this vol­ ume absorption necessitates a more detailed analysis of the three- dimensional shape of the focused spot. In this section, we investigate aberration and self-focusing, which are related to the nonlinear refractive index, on the initial energy deposition area of a focused nanosecond pulse. Energy loss of interface reflection is not considered. 4.1.1. Focused spot of Gaussian pulse in air The three-dimensional amplitude distribution of a Gaussian pulse in a transparent medium follows the Eq. (1) [29]. Here, the three- dimensional form (x, y, z) is written to a two-dimensional form (x, z) due to the axis rotational symmetry: ψ(x, z) = ψ0̅̅̅̅ 2 π √ ω0exp{ −i[ϕ0 −ϕ(z) ] } ω(z) × exp [ −i kx2 2R(z) − x2 ω2(z) ] (1) where, k = 2π/λ is the wave number, λ is the wavelength in the material, ω(z), ϕ(z) and R(z) describe the beam diameter, phase shift, and radius of curvature as functions of z, respectively. According to the invariance criterion, the irradiance distribution of the Gaussian beam after focusing still follows the Gaussian law. In the most practical cases, the waist of a focused Gaussian beam is located near the focal plane of the focusing lens, therefore the intensity profile in the focal plane is the same as in the waist. The irradiance distribution in the beam waist near the focal plane follows: IG(ρ) = IG0exp (−2ρ2 ω2 0 ) (2) where, ρ is the radius on the focal plane, IG0 is the peak of irradiance, ω0 is the radius of the beam waist. The beam waist radius of the focused beam is [11]: ω0 = 2λfM2 πD (3) where, f is the effective focal length of the lens, D is the input diameter of the beam (1/e2), M2 is the laser beam quality factor. In this paper, f is 100 mm, λ is 532 nm, D is 10.8 mm, M2is 1.2, and ω0 is 3.76 μm. 4.1.2. Effect of aberration on the focused spot inside the flat glass When a laser beam is focused inside the glass with a flat surface, the interface between air and glass becomes a part of the combined optical system. Therefore, the influence of aberration caused by plane should be analyzed. Fig. 7(a) illustrates the spherical aberration as laser beam focus in the glass. According to Snell’s law, the longitudinal spherical aberration da can be calculated by Eq. (4) [12]. da = d0 ⎛ ⎜ ⎝̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ n2 0g −NA2 √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ n2 0a −NA2 √ −n0g n0a ⎞ ⎟ ⎠ (4) where, d0 is the focus depth in air, n0a is the linear refractive index of air, n0g is the linear refractive index of glass, and NA is 0.06. For the light beam propagating from air (optically less dense medium) to glass (optically dense medium), the longitudinal spherical aberration is pos­ itive. The deeper the focus in glass, the greater the longitudinal spherical aberration. However, the longitudinal spherical aberration is small in this work because of low NA, only 15.80 μm in soda-lime glass (n0g = 1.53) even focused at a depth of −10 mm. For laser pulse with Gaussian mode in both temporal and spatial, the effective energy deposition region is characterized by waist diameter and Rayleigh length. Rayleigh length is lengthened in an optical dense medium, as shown in Fig. 7(b). The Rayleigh length of the focused spot in transparent media is [23]: ZR1 = n0ZR0 = n0 πω2 0 λ (5) where, n0 is the linear refractive index of the medium, ω0 is the radius of the beam waist at the focus, λ is the wavelength of the laser. In this paper, the ZR1 in soda-lime glass is 127.67 μm. The initial energy deposition region of the focused nanosecond pulse in glass is elongated due to aberration and refraction. In the soda-lime glass with a thickness of 10 mm, the maximum length of the initial en­ ergy deposition area is 143.47 μm (ZR1 + da). However, the average length of LIFM is >650 μm at different focus depths, as shown in Fig. 4. There may be some nonlinear effects in the process of laser-induced modification. 4.1.3. Effect of nonlinear self-focusing on initial energy deposition The elongation of energy distribution caused by nonlinear self- focusing should be considered for high peak power pulse irradiance glass. In this case, the material becomes a part of the optical system. The critical power Pcr that causes self-focusing in a focused spot is [30]: Pcr = 3.77λ2 8πn0n2 (6) where, n0 is the linear refractive index of the transparent medium, n2 is the nonlinear refractive index. For laser irradiation with a wavelength of 532 nm, the critical power of self-focusing in soda-lime glass is about Fig. 4. (a) The LIFM at different focus depths in soda-lime glass, lateral view, (b) statistical results of LIFM. X. Fan et al.

[PAGE 6] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 101 (2023) 1176–1187 1181 Fig. 5. Micro-structures of filamentous modification in soda-lime glass, (a) optical image of micro-crack clusters, (b–e) SEM images of micro-voids at different positions of filamentous modification. X. Fan et al.