[PAGE 1] Appl Phys A (2009) 94: 555–558 DOI 10.1007/s00339-008-4973-5 Self-guided glass drilling by femtosecond laser pulses David J. Hwang · Kuniaki Hiromatsu · Hirofumi Hidai · Costas P. Grigoropoulos Received: 5 August 2008 / Accepted: 10 November 2008 / Published online: 27 November 2008 © Springer-Verlag 2008 Abstract Straight through-holes of high aspect ratio have been fabricated in glass by femtosecond laser pulses, utiliz- ing unique characteristics of ultrafast lasers such as volu- metric multi-photon absorption and nonlinear self-focusing. In this study, interestingly, the drilling process was initiated and progressed in a self-regulated manner, while the laser focus was ﬁxed through the specimen at the neighborhood of the rear surface that was in contact with liquid during the entire drilling process. The deposition of laser energy along the nonlinearly extended focal range and the guided drilling along the pre-deﬁned region are explained based on time- resolved optical transmission and emission measurements. PACS 42.62.-b · 42.70.Ce · 82.50.Pt Much attention has been paid on fabricating three-dimen- sional microstructures in transparent materials by ultrashort pulse laser radiation. When ultrashort laser pulses are fo- cused inside a transparent material, only a very limited re- D.J. Hwang · K. Hiromatsu · H. Hidai · C.P. Grigoropoulos () Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1740, USA e-mail: cgrigoro@me.berkeley.edu K. Hiromatsu Research Center, AGC ASAHI GLASS CO., LTD., Address 1-1, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa, Japan K. Hiromatsu · H. Hidai Department of Mechanical Sciences and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan C.P. Grigoropoulos Advanced Energy Technologies Department, EETD, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA gion near the focal volume absorbs laser energy by nonlinear multi-photon process [1]. Hence, a variety of interesting ap- plications have been pursued, including optical waveguides [2], microchannels [3], and recently hybrid opto-ﬂuidic de- vices [4] inside glass. Although glass offers optical trans- parency as well as thermal, mechanical and chemical stabil- ity, the fabrication of high-aspect ratio features is challeng- ing by conventional techniques. Among abundant efforts in this ﬁeld, direct-ablation based three-dimensional microchannel fabrication has been demonstrated [3, 5]. In these studies, glass drilling was per- formed by focusing an ultra-short laser beam on the rear surface through the transparent sample and scanning the laser focus towards the front surface by taking advantage of the volumetric multi-photon absorption process in order to achieve more stable absorption and facilitate removal of the machined material debris. The debris removal efﬁciency was further improved by maintaining the machined spot in contact with liquid. Compared with the subsequent etching based approach [4], direct-ablation methods provide single step fabrication with relatively faster processing speed that may be ideal for precise via-hole fabrication. In this study, liquid-assisted glass drilling is performed by femtosecond laser pulses of 800 nm wavelength. How- ever, in contrast to previous investigations, the laser focus is ﬁxed in the neighborhood of the rear surface of the glass without scanning the laser focus throughout the drilling process, thus enabling simple and stable processing condi- tions. The results are also interesting in respect to fundamen- tal aspects of the nonlinear femtosecond laser beam propa- gation through transparent materials. Figure 1(a) shows a schematic diagram of the femtosec- ond laser glass drilling and Fig. 1(b) the in situ monitor- ing system. Detailed description of the experimental ap- paratus is found elsewhere [3]. Brieﬂy, femtosecond laser

[PAGE 2] 556 D.J. Hwang et al. Fig. 1 Schematic diagrams of (a) femtosecond laser glass drilling sys- tem, and (b) in situ monitoring setup pulses with temporal width of about 100 fs full-width-half- maximum, 800 nm wavelength, and 1 kHz repetition rate are focused near the rear surface of glass sample that is in con- tact with methanol through a long working distance objec- tive lens of ∼0.14 numerical aperture. Side view transmis- sion (under white light illumination) and emission images were taken to monitor the process in situ via a 2X objective lens coupled with 12X zoom lens. For detailed investiga- tion of the drilling mechanism, the spectrum of the collected laser-induced emission was analyzed by a gated spectrome- ter (Princeton Instruments). Since the applied pulse energy level (∼157 µJ, measured after the objective lens) was sub- stantially higher than the respective ablation threshold of bulk glass, the laser focus was intentionally shifted towards the liquid (∼100 µm for the speciﬁc case of chosen focusing lens and glass material) from the geometrical focus, in order to avoid direct initiation of the rear surface ablation. Under the adjusted focal condition, glass drilling begins after ir- radiation of a series of laser pulses (typically ∼1000–2000 pulses). Figure 2 shows in situ side view transmission images of the drilling process by white light illumination. With- out noticeable change in optical image in the early stage (t <∼1 (s), Fig. 2(a), where t is elapsed time after turn- ing on the laser beam), the actual drilling began at t ∼1 (s) from the liquid–glass interface (Fig.2(b)). The drilling then continued accompanied by vigorous debris ejection till com- plete through-holes were fabricated at t ∼35 (s) across the 1.25 mm thick glass, as conﬁrmed by liquid transfer through the machined channel and the wetting of the front surface (Fig. 2(f)). The average diameter of the drilled channel was ∼120 µm (∼80 µm at rear surface and ∼160 µm at the front surface) at a mean aspect ratio of ∼10:1. It is reminded that Fig. 2 Snapshots of in situ transmission microscope image of drilling process. Laser focusing path is displayed on the top ﬁgure (not in real scale). (a) Initial energy deposition stage, (b) actual drilling initiated from rear surface, (c)–(e) continuous guided drilling process along pre-deﬁned region, machined debris ejection motions are inspected from the machined hole, and (f) liquid leaks out from the other-side of completed through-hole (arrow marks indicate liquid leak-out) the current drilling process does not involve relative scan- ning motion of the laser focus with respect to the sample. The average processing speed of ∼36 µm/s achieved by the present ﬁxed laser focus scheme is signiﬁcantly faster than the achieved by scanning (∼1–30 µm/s). Furthermore, it avoids undesirable termination of the drilling process that occurs at non-optimum scanning speed in the case of scan- ning conﬁguration [3, 5]. Channels of similar length were machined by ﬁxing the laser focus at the front surface of glass material in a vacuum environment although severe cracks observed near the machined holes [6]. The greatly ex- tended channel length compared to the small depth of focus (DOF) of the lens (∼14 µm) has to be attributed to the non- linear self-focusing driven by ultra-short pulsed laser. When the laser is focused on the rear surface, a higher portion of the applied laser pulse energy is absorbed inside the glass bulk [7]. Since the laser ﬂuence was set at a level near the ab- lation threshold at the rear surface, the extended zone inside glass upstream of the laser focus experienced the type of lo- cal structural modiﬁcation encountered in optical waveguide fabrication [2]. Similar side-view imaging performed without white light illumination (Fig. 3) elucidates the drilling mechanism by visualizing laser-induced plasma emission. A bright region was observed almost instantaneously after turning on the laser (Fig. 3(e)) and persisted for ∼1 (s) before the ac- tual initiation of the drilling process at the rear glass spec- imen surface (Fig. 3(f)) based on imaging at ∼30 frames per second (fps). Imaging at 250 fps (i.e., capturing every

[PAGE 3] Self-guided glass drilling by femtosecond laser pulses 557 Fig. 3 A visualization of laser-induced plasma emission during the drilling process. (a)–(e) initial energy deposition stage, wide spectrum plasma emission inspected through the whole thickness of the glass, (f) actual drilling (ablation) initiated at rear surface of the glass and ablation induced plasma visualized, (g)–(h) continuous material removal along energy pre-deposition region, and (i) permanent image of drilled hole. No white light illumination was applied for the emission images in (a)–(h). High speed camera (operated at 250 Hz capturing rate) was used to acquire images (a)–(d) four laser pulses, Fig. 3(a)–(d)), could not detect emission upon the initial few laser shots (∼8 shots, Fig. 3(a), (b)). Emission appeared after ∼12–16 laser shots (Fig. 3(c), (d)), clearly showing accumulated pulse effects along the non- linear self-focusing zone formed inside the glass medium. Actual drilling was initiated from the rear surface (Fig. 3(f)) since that was subjected to the highest laser intensity and surface material removal was easier. Extremely bright emis- sion light induced by laser ablation was visible on the ab- lated spot. It should be noted that the ﬁnal shape of the drilled hole approximately followed the envelope of the ear- lier observed bright emission region (compare Fig. 3(e) with Fig. 3(i)). Time-resolved spectroscopic analysis was per- formed to clarify the laser-induced emission. Due to the lim- ited sampling rate of the intensiﬁed charge coupled device (ICCD) camera in the gated spectrometer, the repetition rate of the femtosecond laser was reduced to ∼50 Hz. Figure 4(a) displays emission spectra taken every two pulses. The inten- sities of both the broadband visible emission and scattered laser light (∼800 nm wavelength) increased with the num- ber of laser shots, as plotted in Fig. 4(b). Care was paid to collecting emission light from the entire region of the drilled zone by a 2X objective lens. In comparison to measurements done in the absence of liquid, the emission from the glass bulk side collected by a higher magniﬁcation lens showed discrete peaks near ∼545 and ∼365 nm, possibly due to the optical breakdown and/or ﬁlamentation, as explained by several groups [8]. Strong atomic transition peaks as typi- cally observed in laser induced breakdown spectroscopy [9] Fig. 4 (a) Measured emission spectra in the early stage of glass drilling process, and (b) a plot of intensities of both the broad- band visible emission (integrated valued in the wavelength range of 400–700 nm) and scattered laser light (measured value ∼790 nm wave- length) with respect to the number of laser shots from impurity elements (Na and Ba in B270 glass mater- ial used in this experiment [10]) were dominant near the ablation spots. However, when the collection was adjusted to encompass the entire drilling region, the contribution of the aforementioned discrete peaks was signiﬁcantly reduced and a wideband spectrum became prominent. Even though additional wideband spectral components from liquid break- down cannot be excluded, the increasing trend both in emis- sion and scattering proves that measurements acquired at early timings of Figs. 3 and 4 are effectively associated to the bulk glass modiﬁcation process. It is inferred that the reinforcement of the bright emission and the growing scattering signal signify accumulated structural change in- curred before the actual ablative material removal process. Therefore, once ablation was initiated at the rear surface, the structurally modiﬁed region that was deﬁned by the preced- ing laser pulses experienced preferential ablation, leading to self-guided drilling. In summary, liquid-assisted drilling of high aspect ra- tio holes in glass was successfully demonstrated by fem- tosecond laser pulses with the laser focus ﬁxed near the rear liquid–glass interface so that the actual drilling process could be retarded. Visualization and spectral measurement of laser-induced emission revealed that laser energy was de- posited inside the glass bulk, pre-deﬁning a modiﬁed struc- ture region via the contribution of nonlinear self-focusing.

[PAGE 4] 558 D.J. Hwang et al. This volumetric structural modiﬁcation took place before the commencement of the actual material removal, thereby enabling a self-guided drilling process. Acknowledgement Support by the National Science Foundation un- der grant DMI-0556363 is gratefully acknowledged. References 1. C.B. Schaffer, A. Brodeur, J.F. Garcia, E. Mazur, Opt. Lett. 26, 93–95 (2001) 2. K.M. Davis, K. Miura, N. Sugimoto, K. Hirao, Opt. Lett. 21, 1729–1731 (1996) 3. D.J. Hwang, T.Y. Choi, C.P. Grigoropoulos, Appl. Phys. A 79, 605–612 (2004) 4. M. Kim, D.J. Hwang, H. Jeon, K. Hiromatsu, C.P. Grigoropoulos, Lab. Chip. (2008). doi:10.1039/b808366e 5. Y. Li, K. Itoh, W. Watanabe, K. Yamada, D. Kuroda, J. Nishii, Y. Jiang, Opt. Lett. 26, 1912–1914 (2001) 6. E.E.B. Campbell, D. Ashkenasi, A. Rosenfeld, Mat. Sci. Forum 301, 123–144 (1999) 7. A. Salleo, F.Y. Genin, M.D. Feit, A.M. Rubenchik, T. Sands, S.S. Mao, R.E. Russo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 2840–2842 (2001) 8. N.T. Nguyen, A. Saliminia, W. Liu, S.L. Chin, R. Vallee, Opt. Lett. 28, 1591–1593 (2003) 9. B. Lal, F.Y. Yueh, J.P. Singh, Appl. Opt. 44, 3668–3674 (2005) 10. A.Y. Zhang, T. Suetsugu, K. Kadono, J. Non-Crystal. Sol. 353, 44–50 (2007)