[PAGE 1] Full length article Shadowgraphic approach to through glass vias (TGV) metrology and inspection Kuan Lu a, Yeaeun Lim a , Heebum Chun a, Jiyong Park b,c , ChaBum Lee a,* a J. Mike Walker ’66 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M University, 3123 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-3123, USA b Korea Institute of Industrial Technology, 156 Gaebeol-ro, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 21999, South Korea c University of Science and Technology, 156 Gaebeol-ro, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 21999, South Korea A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Shadowgraphy Through glass via (TGV) Metrology Inspection Semiconductor Packaging A B S T R A C T This study presents a novel shadowgraphy-based inspection method for through-glass vias (TGV) metrology. TGVs are critical in modern advanced packaging and three-dimensional integrated circuits (3D IC). Conventional inspection methods have limitations in either resolution, cost, or destructiveness when applied to TGV metrology. To overcome these challenges, a non-destructive and high-efficiency metrology technique based on shadowgraphy is introduced, utilizing oblique-angle illumination to project the shadow contours of TGV top, waist, and bottom onto a single imaging plane. A light emitting diode (LED) is employed to enhance shadow clarity, and further image processing involving Canny edge detection and Hough transformation enables accurate contour extraction. Through simulation and experiment validation, the proposed method achieves high mea­ surement accuracy, with a Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of 1.474 μm and a Mean Absolute Deviation Rate (MADR) of 2.539 % for top/waist diameters, and an RMSE of 0.865 μm and MADR of 0.132 % for depths. In summary, the proposed method has the potential to provide accurate information for TGV parameter characterization. 1. Introduction With the advancement of packaging technology and three- dimensional integrated circuits (3D IC), through-glass vias (TGV) play an increasingly critical role in microelectronics [1]. TGVs are vertical interconnect structures passing through the glass substrate. Similar to through-silicon vias (TSV), TGVs provide high-density and high-speed vertical electrical interconnections between chips, allowing for the shortest interconnection distances and minimal spacing between wafer layers [1]. The application of TGVs effectively has enhanced device integration density and shortened signal transmission paths, improving the electrical performance and reliability of the device by reducing parasitic resistance–capacitance effects [1–3]. Compared to conven­ tional TSVs, TGVs are particularly suitable for high-frequency device packaging and heterogeneous integration due to low dielectric loss, excellent thermal stability, and high insulation properties of glass [2,3]. Hence, TGVs have become essential in high-performance computing, radio-frequency communications, and MEMS sensor integration. As TGVs significantly contribute to the development and miniaturi­ zation of 3D ICs, control of geometrical dimensions and fabrication defects is essential. Different from TSVs, TGVs have a more complicated inner structure and are constructed from two conical segments, as shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b). Geometric parameters can significantly influence the electrical and thermal performance of the final packaging [1,3]. For instance, a reduced waist diameter could lead to poor interconnections and increased signal delay; an eccentric structure could cause stress concentration [3–5]. Therefore, an effective inspection technique is critical to identify and characterize geometrical defects during TGV fabrication, ensuring optimal yield and performance. Recent advances have improved both the fabrication and metalli­ zation of TGVs. Hou et al. developed a laser-induced wet etching assisted by ultrasonic vibration and sample motion, achieving massive high- consistency TGV arrays with 0.73 % diameter deviation [6]. Liang et al. realized defect-free super-filling of large-aperture vias through asymmetric pulse electrodeposition [7]. These studies provide repre­ sentative TGV images with and without voids, as shown in Fig. 1(c), and underscore the importance of precise geometrical control for defect suppression and process optimization. Because of its complicated inner structure and transparent substrate, TGV cannot be effectively inspected by most methods that are used for * Corresponding author. E-mail address: cblee@tamu.edu (C. Lee). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics and Laser Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optlastec https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2025.114261 Received 10 August 2025; Received in revised form 7 October 2025; Accepted 4 November 2025 Optics & Laser Technology 193 (2026) 114261 Available online 9 November 2025 0030-3992/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

[PAGE 2] TSV metrology [8–10]. Optical microscopy (OM) is the most widely used method in industry for TGV surface morphology observation [11]. However, two-dimensional surface images cannot effectively assess the waist and bottom features. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is suitable for a detailed inspection of morphology and internal defects within TGVs but is limited by operational cost and slow scanning speed. To prepare for the cross-section sample, Focused Ion Beam (FIB) is usually utilized to cut through the TGV [12], which is destructive and time-consuming. As a result, SEM is not suitable for large-scale TGV inspection during industrial production. A non-contact and three- dimensional surface morphology measurement can be achieved by using Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM) [11]. Although this laser scanning method achieves sub-micron resolution, it faces limita­ tions in imaging deep internal structures of TGVs due to optical diffraction and attenuation. For selective TGV sampling and failure analysis, X-ray Computed Tomography (XCT) is employed [13]. This non-destructive method visualizes comprehensive 3D internal structures within TGVs, including morphology, internal voids, and sidewall cracks [11]. Although high-speed XCT has advanced recently, equipment costs and maintenance requirements remain high. Diffraction analysis is another method for via characterization [14]. Studies based on knife- edge interferometry and gray-field diffraction analysis show that this method enables accurate evaluation of Si vias, and has potential for TSV applications, though it requires complex physical modeling [8,9]. Table 1 state-of-the-art section summarizes the features of current TGV metrology methods. Considering the limitations of current methods in either efficiency, cost, or applicability, a new technology for TGV measurement needed. Shadowgraphy technique is a non-destructive inspection based on op­ tical projection [15–17]. The principle is that when light passes through transparent media with non-uniform refractive indices or distinct geo­ metric contours, a visible shadow projection forms on the receiving plane. Shadowgraphy has been adapted to various scenarios due to its simplicity and effectiveness [15–17]. In biomedical fields, subtle variations in tissue properties or fluid flow within transparent biological components can be detected by such a technology [18–20]. In the field of fluid dynamics, Shadowgraphy is utilized to visualize density gradi­ ents in gas flows and aerodynamic phenomena [21,22]. Inspired by these applications, a novel TGV metrology method based on shadowgraphy is proposed in this study. When the light passes through the TGV at an optimized angle, the edge of its circular contour causes the light to bend or be blocked, further casting a contour pro­ jection onto the imaging plane. With top, waist, and bottom edges being projected on the same imaging plane, simultaneous extraction of mul­ tiple diameters can be achieved from one shadow image in a high- efficiency and non-destructive manner, as summarized in proposed section in Table 1. Details will be discussed in the following sections. 2. Measurement principle 2.1. TGV sample description TGVs inspected in this study have a nominal height of 630 ± 10 μm, as determined by two-points height measurements from the top and bottom surfaces. As illustrated in Fig. 2, several geometric parameters are considered vital for functionality, including three diameters (top, waist, and bottom). These dimensional parameters are further quanti­ fied using OM, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The top and waist diameters are extracted from high-resolution images by identifying circular contours, with an average of 60.5 μm and 46.6 μm, respectively. Notably, it is not feasible to accurately determine the bottom diameter from a single mi­ croscopy image, regardless of the viewing angle, as shown in Fig. 3(b). OM revealed distinguishable geometric deviations in samples, as shown in Fig. 4. Defect#1 and Defect#2 exhibited significant radius variations in both the top and waist. For top contour, the diameters are 5.1 % and 4.6 % smaller, respectively; for waist contour, the diameters are 16.2 % and 14.1 % smaller, respectively. Along with perfect refer­ ence TGV, these defect samples are also selected for simulation and Fig. 1. (a) TSV array, (b) TGV array, and (c) SEM images of TGV with and without defects [7]. K. Lu et al. Optics and Laser Technology 193 (2026) 114261 2

[PAGE 3] experiments to validate the geometrical features extracted from shadowgraph-based methods. Due to the fabrication constraints, this study focuses on this sample, but TGVs with distinct dimensional characteristics would be further selected to represent nominal and defective geometrics, ensuring that the feasibility of the proposed shadowgraphy-based method could be evaluated. 2.2. Shadowgraphy for TGV metrology As discussed in the previous section, shadowgraphy is an optical technique to visualize refractive index variations or geometric discon­ tinuities within transparent or semi-transparent media. Shadowgraphy is particularly suitable for high-throughput quality assessment during semiconductor packaging processes due to its applicability in non- contact measurement and defect detection of microstructures. In this study, a shadowgraphy system with oblique-angle illumina­ tion has been developed to extract geometrical features and identify defects in TGV structures, as demonstrated in Fig. 5(a). The oblique incident light allows the projection of top, waist, and bottom circular contours onto the top imaging plane, enabling simultaneous visualiza­ tion of multiple critical cross-sections. The incident angle was optimized Table 1 Summary of state-of-the-art and proposed TGV metrology methods. Meth. Princ. Eff. Res. (μm) * Meas. Time / TGV** Cost (Equip. / Oper.) Destr. Array Comp. Ref. State-of-the-art OM Visible imaging 2–3 < 1 s Low / Low N Y [11] SEM Electron-beam imaging ~0.1 ＞60 s High / High Y*** Limited [12] CLSM Laser scanning & optical slicing ~0.3 10–30 s High / High N Limited [11] XCT X-ray penetration & tomography ~1 ＞60 s High / High N Limited [13] Interferometry Edge diffraction 2–3 1–2 s Low / Low N N [8,9] Proposed Shadowgraphy Shadow imaging 1–2 1–2 s Low / Low N Y ​ * Limited by wavelength and optical components. ** Estimated value, depending on processing equipment performance and specific operation. *** SEM itself is non-destructive, but cross-section preparation is required. Fig. 2. Demonstration of TGV sample in this study. Fig. 3. Microscopy images of the TGV sample from (a) top view and (b) side view. K. Lu et al. Optics and Laser Technology 193 (2026) 114261 3

[PAGE 4] and determined through simulation, ensuring that the waist shadow is not obscured, and adjacent shadows do not interfere with each other. To extract accurate radius and position information of each projected shadow, the shadow image undergoes a sequence of image processing steps, including morphological denoising, Canny edge detection, and Hough circle transformation [23]. Considering the geometric distortion caused by the oblique illumination, the projected major axis dimension follows the relationship: sin ( θglass ) = nair nglass sin(θ) (1) Dshadow = Dr cos ( θglass ) (2) where θ is the incident angle of light source, θglass is that inside glass substrate, nair and nglass are refractive index, and Dr is the true physical diameter. Through Eq. (2), the two-dimensional projection sizes ob­ tained from the shadow images can be converted back to actual three- dimensional structural parameters. As shown in Fig. 5(b), three diameters along with center distances Dc−c between top and bottom circular shadows can be measured. Dc−c and effective depth h construct a right triangle, where the angle at the bottom corresponds to the light incident angle in glass substrate θglass. Based on geometric calculations, the effective depth h can be derived as h = Dc−c tan ( θglass ) (3) Through Eq. (3), the effective height can be estimated as well. In this study, multiple TGVs are studied comprehensively through simulation and experiments. Results from shadowgraphy, including top/ waist diameters and effective heights, are mathematically compared with the reference obtained from conventional methods, in terms of Mean Absolute Deviation Rate (MADR) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). After completing the data extraction and analysis, the TGV arrays can be simultaneously reconstructed for visualization, as depicted in Fig. 6. The proposed method enables accurate 3D modeling, allowing for detailed analysis and defect identification of individual TGV, as well as large-scale, industry-oriented TGV arrays analysis to rapidly identify Fig. 4. Microscopic images of sample (defected TGVs are marked in red boxes): (a) focus on top, and (b) focus on waist. Fig. 5. The proposed shadowgraphy for TGV parameter characterization. Fig. 6. Demonstration of reconstructed TGV arrays by shadowgraphy. K. Lu et al. Optics and Laser Technology 193 (2026) 114261 4

[PAGE 5] defective samples. 3. Simulation results and discussion Geometric dimensions of TGV were obtained through conventional OM; these data were further used in simulation to form the shadow on the top surface. The reference TGV has a top, waist, and bottom diameter of 60 μm, 45 μm, and 60 μm, respectively, with a height of 630 μm. Under 450 nm incident light condition, the refraction index of the glass medium was set to the standard value of 1.53 and that of air to 1.00. Since the refraction of incident light in glass substrate will be considered in the modeling, all angles represent the original incident angle. The simulation schematic is consistent with that shown in Fig. 5, and the corresponding shadow images at various incident angles were simulated, as illustrated in Fig. 7. For waist and bottom shadows, major axis deformations resulting from the oblique projection are considered based on Eq. (1). A waist shadow deformation is demonstrated in Fig. 8, with a relatively large incident angle. Based on the simulation, it is concluded that when the incident angle is between 4◦and 4.5◦, the waist shadow remains unobstructed while shadows of adjacent TGVs do not interfere (the horizontal length of each shadow is less than the 120 μm pitch). The angle is defined with respect to the vertical axis, which is normal to the sample surface. Two defective TGVs have been identified as discussed previously; their dimensions have been now further adapted in simulation to vali­ date the feasibility of shadowgraphy. Their dimensional parameters are displayed in Table 2, with simulation results shown in Fig. 9. It can be concluded that at an incident angle of 4.3◦, the top, waist, and bottom shadows of every model can be observed on the top surface, and shadow contours among cases exhibit significant differences. Simulation results provide a solid foundation for subsequent experiments; simulated shadow images will be overlaid with the experimental results for further analysis. Considering the applicability of the method, the optimal incident angle may vary for TGV samples of different sizes; however, this parameter can be accurately and easily determined through modeling and simulation. Fig. 10 showed the workable incident angle range under different TGV geometrical conditions. The angle range remained relatively stable across different parameters, indicating the shadowgraphy exhibited robustness to structural variations. As shown in Fig. 10(a), when the incident angle exceeds the upper limit, bottom projection may overlap with adjacent TGV, whereas if it falls below the lower limit, the waist projection becomes obscured. It is worth noting that a larger incident angle may shift the imaging system from bright field (B-field) to near dark field (D-field). The D-field provides enhanced contrast but leads to signal intensity reduction at the same time. As discussed in the previous sections, excessive incident angles cause shadow overlapping issue as well. Therefore, a 10 % safety Fig. 7. Simulation results according to different incident angles: (a) 3.5◦, (b) 4.0◦, and (c) 4.5◦. Fig. 8. Demonstration of shadow deformation. Table 2 The geometry dimensions of different TGV models. Reference Defect#1 Defect#2 Top (μm) 60 57 58 Waist (μm) 45 38 39 Bottom (μm) 60 57 58 K. Lu et al. Optics and Laser Technology 193 (2026) 114261 5

[PAGE 6] margin was applied to the optimal incident angle range to balance vis­ ibility and signal quality. Fig. 10(a) also shows that an increase in top/bottom diameter would narrow the optimal angle range slightly, since bottom shadow can overlap on adjacent TGV with shorter moving distance. The waist diameter, on the other hand, mainly affects the inner contour, as the waist diameter decreases, the required incident angle increases corre­ spondingly to maintain visibility, as shown in Fig. 10(b). An increase in TGV pitch slightly broadens the incident angle range, since shadow interference between adjacent TGVs would be reduced, as illustrated in Fig. 10(c). Fig. 10(d) demonstrates that when height increases, the optimal incident angle would slightly decrease, as higher aspect ratio make the bottom shadow move further under same illumination angle. Potential warpage was also considered. According to et al., an 8-inch (200 mm) glass interposer exhibits a maximum warpage of about 0.05 mm at room temperature [24]. For a conservative estimation, the maximum out-of-plane deformation of the sample, which is a 100mm × 100mm glass substrate, was assumed to reach 0.1 mm. The local tilt angle induced by such curvature can be estimated geometrically as θwarp = tan−1(bow R ) (4) in which bow is the maximum out of plane deformation and R is half of the sample size. The calculated θwarp is approximately 0.11◦. The results show that under realistic warpage conditions, the effective illumination angle remains within the workable range of the proposed shadowgraphy method. 4. Experiment setup and image processing method 4.1. Experiment setup The shadowgraphy setup was constructed as depicted in Fig. 11. It is characterized by its light incident at an oblique angle, enabling the imaging of the top, waist, and bottom circular shadows of TGV onto a single plane. The incident angle was set to 4.3◦based on the simulation results, this refers to the angle before entering the glass substrate, as simulation already accounted for the refraction index change. Consid­ ering the short wavelength and high transmittance through glass, a blue LED (λ 450 nm) was employed as the light source to enhance the reso­ lution and contrast of the circular shadow imaging. Compared to traditional white LED, blue illumination minimizes chromatic aberra­ tion and stray light interference; thereby, imaging clarity is improved. When the incident light passes through the TGV, the shadow image is captured by the Charge-coupled Device (CCD) on the top; the 20 × objective lens coupled with CCD provides a good balance between res­ olution, field of view, and operational space. 4.2. Image processing method Subsequent analysis is conducted to characterize TGV features, as depicted in Fig. 12. Fig. 12(a) shows the original shadow image with projections of the top, waist, and bottom edges. To eliminate the speckle-like noise and background fluctuations, a morphologic opening-closing filter with a small disk-shaped structuring element, usually 2 to 3 pixels, was applied as the first step. This procedure further removed isolated bright spots and filled small dark gaps. Therefore, continuity of circular boundary was enhanced. After the denoising, Canny edge detection was applied, and this method identified a clear and continuous shadow contour by computing image gradients. The resulting green contour indicates the extracted boundary of the shadow, as shown in Fig. 12(b). Fig. 12(c) then presents the result of the Hough circle transformation, such an algorithm detected the top, waist, and bottom contour by mapping edge points into a parameter space and selecting the best circles. This allows robust detection of circular shapes even when the edge is partially missing or noisy. The circular shape at different depths is fitted, with red, blue, and yellow representing the top, waist, and bottom contours, respectively. This comprehensive algorithm—morphological denoising, Canny Fig. 9. Simulation results at 4.3◦: (a) reference, (b) defect case #1, and (c) defect case #2. K. Lu et al. Optics and Laser Technology 193 (2026) 114261 6