[PAGE 1] ORIGINAL ARTICLE Simulation and experimental study on laser drilling of nickel-based alloy with thermal barrier coatings Zhaoyang Zhai1,2 & Wenjun Wang1,2 & Xuesong Mei1,2 Received: 24 April 2016 /Accepted: 16 September 2016 /Published online: 4 October 2016 # Springer-Verlag London 2016 Abstract We investigated drilling in a nickel-based alloy covered with thermal barrier coating using a millisecond- pulsed laser and made a comparison between simulation and experimental data. We used the finite element model with multilayer structure in accordance with the thermo-physical performance parameters of the thermal barrier coating, the bond coating layer, and the nickel-based alloy. We then uploaded the laser on the coasting surface by means of Gaussian thermal density. It was possible to determine both the diameter and depth of microhole changes with increasing pulses using a temperature distribution analysis. The obtained surface profile is in agreement with the experimental results. A stress distribution cloud chart of microholes was generated following a coupling analysis of thermal stress. Post- processing and analysis of the simulation made it possible for us to understand the formation mechanism of microholes and cracks. Furthermore, the simulation results can serve as the basis for a pulsed laser drilling study and crack analysis of multilayer materials. Keywords Thermal barrier coatings . Nickel-based alloy . Laser drilling . Coupling analysis of thermal stress . Crack 1 Introduction As laser technology is developing at a fast pace, advanced laser manufacturing and processing technology becomes increasingly important in areas like the automobile indus- try, machinery, metallurgical chemistry, microelectronics, and aerospace. Laser drilling, a variation of laser machin- ing, is used for precise microhole production of many vital components of industrial products such as the turbine blade film holes in aircraft engines. The advanced turbine blades are made of nickel-based alloy covered with ceramic ther- mal barrier coatings (TBCs) [1]. Film cooling through holes is a common way to ensure the turbine’s reliability when it is exposed to high-temperature combustion gas. Round holes are usually used in engineering, ranging from 0.25 to 1.25 mm in diameter. There are approximately 30,000 holes in a typical turbine blade for each engine. It is technologically challenging to produce these film holes with a small diameter and high quality [2]. By virtue of high efficiency, non-contact, low heat input, more available materials, higher precision, and better consis- tency, laser drilling is widely used for film hole machining worldwide. Nevertheless, it is a quite intricate physicochemi- cal process, in which a number of fields are involved, includ- ing optics, thermodynamics, hydromechanics, metallurgy, and light-induced plasma technology. The mathematical models for laser processing developed by the scholars often involve idealized assumptions. Consequently, the calculated results are not always realistic, and they may not provide theoretical guidance for the laser processing of multiple-pulse film holes. Typical TBC systems are primarily composed of three parts: ceramic layer, bond coating layer, and high-temperature alloy substrate [3]. Because of various compositions, the thermo- physical properties of these parts are different as characterized by their melting and boiling points, specific heat capacity, * Wenjun Wang wenjunwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn 1 School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China 2 State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710054, China Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2017) 90:1871–1879 DOI 10.1007/s00170-016-9485-4

[PAGE 2] coefficient of thermal conductivity, and coefficient of linear expansion. This will adversely affect the microhole appear- ance shaped by laser drilling. Besides, a variety of defects, such as cracks between bond coating layers, inevitably occur during the manufacturing process. Sun et al. conducted an experiment on processing film holes on a nickel-based single crystal alloy with TBCs using millisecond laser technology. This experiment showed that when the fluence of the milli- second laser making the holes is reduced, a molten pool effect of high-temperature alloy would take place in the ceramic layer, and distinct cracks between layers were found. Girardot et al. [4] analyzed the profile of microholes caused by different melting points during the process of drilling TBCs with a millisecond laser. The group explored the causes of layer-to-layer crack from the view of ejection impact. Han et al. [5] analyzed the distribution of interlayers and axial residual stress in the TBCs system, and compared laser Raman spectrum frequency shift and finite element computing results. Guinard et al. [6] performed millisecond laser drilling on the TBCs prepared with different methods, and compared the interlayer residual stress through electronic speckle inter- ferometry. This way they could find the causes for crack for- mation in an intuitive way. Voisey et al. investigated the effect of laser drilling on the interfacial toughness of plasma-sprayed TBCs using a finite difference process model [7]. Zhang et al. simulated the process of material vaporization removal during laser drilling process using a finite element model [8]. Chen et al. established a physical model using finite element soft- ware and presented theoretical and experimental methods for drilling alumina ceramic substrates using nanosecond-pulsed ultraviolet laser [9]. However, a single material is mainly used in the existing research of laser drilling simulation, and microhole morphology is simulated only using thermal simu- lation. The explanation of the cause of the crack in the defect analysis is lacking quantitative details. In the analysis of thermodynamics, stress fields are accompa- nied by temperature fields, and the thermal stress gen- erated by temperature is one of the major causes affect- ing processing quality. Therefore, the simulation of the stress field is crucial [10]. As a technique for processing film holes, millisecond- pulsed laser drilling [11] not only processes metallic materials but also plays a role in processing non-conducting materials such as ceramics. In order to study the effect of a millisecond- pulse laser on the formation of a hole pattern punched into a nickel-based alloy with thermal barrier coating, this paper de- scribes a computational model of multilayer materials based on comprehensive consideration of thermo-physical proper- ties for each layer. ANSYS parameter design language finite element software was used that suits the laser drilling morpho- logical formation process and temperature field distribution of the nickel-based alloy with thermal barrier coatings. We could obtain a better understanding of the causes for crack genera- tion in millisecond laser drilling of multilayer materials through coupling analysis of thermal stress. 2 Theoretical approach and experimental method 2.1 Computational simulation Because the temperature field changes with time and other thermal parameters, laser drilling can be regarded as a nonlin- ear transient heat transfer process. The heat balance equation can be expressed as follows: C T ð Þ ½  T:   þ K T ð Þ ½  T f g ¼ Q T; t ð Þ f g ð1Þ Where [C(T)] is the specific heat substrate, {Ṫ} is the time derivative of temperature, [K(T)] is the conduction substrate, including the thermal conductivity, convection coefficient, ra- diation ratio and shape factor, {T} is the temperature vector of node, and {Q(T,t)} is the heat flow rate vector as a function of time and temperature. The materials in this paper contain three parts: thermal barrier coating, bond coating layer (BC), and substrate. The thermal barrier coating selected in this paper is ZrO2. The heat conductivity of ZrO2 is the lowest among common ceramic materials with the lowest thermal radiation rate, a high reflec- tion rate, and a large coefficient for thermal expansion, which Fig. 1 The nickel-based alloy with thermal barrier coating and bond coating layer: a OM image of materials, and b finite element model 1872 Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2017) 90:1871–1879

[PAGE 3] is similar to that of nickel-based superalloy. The bond coating layer is NiCrAlY, which guarantees tight bonding between the ZrO2 ceramic layer and the substrate, while exerting a good antioxidant effect and thermal protection effect on the sub- strate. The substrate is Inconel 718, nickel-based superalloy with a high yield and creeping strength, as well as a good anti- thermal corrosion property and oxidation resistance. It is com- mercially used for manufacturing turbine blades. The material structure used for the experiment is shown in Fig. 1a. The thickness of each layer is measured by the OLS4000 laser scanning confocal microscope, produced by Olympus Corporation. The finite element model built in accordance with the thermo-physical parameters [12, 13] in Table 1 is shown in Fig. 1b. The initial and boundary conditions are displayed in Eqs. (2) and (3): Tjt¼0 ¼ T0 x; y; z ð Þ ð2Þ −k ∂T ∂n  Γ ¼ q x; y; z; t ð Þ ð3Þ Here, T0 is the initial temperature, which is equal to the ambient temperature, 25 °C, in this study. Here, k is the temperature-dependent thermal conductivity, n is the unit nor- mal vector at the top surface boundary, and q(x,y,z,t) is the imposed heat flux of the Gaussian beam on to the surface, which is obtained using Eq. (4). Table 1 The thermo-physical property parameters Materials ZrO2 NiCrAlY Inconel 718 Thickness (μm) 300 100 2000 Temperature (°C) 20 500 1000 20 500 1000 20 500 1000 Specific heat (J/kg°C) 656 400 439 532 648 Thermal conductivity (W/m°C) 1.2 1.17 1.14 5.8 11 16.2 10.3 18.8 28 Coefficient of thermal expansion (10−6 °C −1) 8.6 9.8 10.3 13.6 15.2 17.2 11.8 14.4 18.7 Density (103kg/m3) 6.04 8.1 8.24 Poisson’s ratio 0.25 0.3 0.3 Elastic modulus (109 Pa) 60 200 199.9 Melting temperature (°C) 2680 1453 1290 Vaporization temperature (°C) 4300 2732 2827 Fig. 2 The intensity distribution of a Gaussian beam Fig. 3 Flowchart of thermo-mechanical coupling of laser drilling Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2017) 90:1871–1879 1873

[PAGE 4] In the course of drilling the hole, the laser energy flows to the material surface as heat flux, as shown in Fig. 2. Because what is selected in the experimental part of this paper is a millisecond-pulsed laser, the output of the laser beams follows a Gaussian distribution. Considering that the used laser beam follows a Gaussian distribution, its heat flux is denoted as follows: q ¼ 2AP πω2 exp −2r2 ω2   ð4Þ where A is the absorption rate of the materials, P is the laser power, ω is the focus radius, and r is the radius distance from the beam center. The parameters selected for the laser are 0.3 ms as the pulse width, 1064 nm as the wavelength, 20 Hz as the repetition fre- quency, 23 W power, 1.15 J as single pulse energy, 120 mm as the focal length, and around 120 μm as the focus radius. When the Gaussian laser beam is focused by the lens, it irradiates the surface of the nickel-based alloy with TBCs. The place where the Gaussian laser beam hits will absorb some light according to its inherent light absorption rate and gener- ate various types of coupling in a very short period of time, which produces a series of thermo-physical process that change drastically. The extremely high power density of the laser pulse can elevate the surface temperature to thousands of degrees Celsius. The substance will begin to melt when its surface temperature exceeds its melting point, and the molten material will begin to vaporize when it increases further. Affected by the thermal shock of the laser pulse, vaporized objects coupled with the molten mass will be sprayed out at a high speed from the solid-liquid interface, during which plas- ma will explode and emit a shock wave. As a result, pits of different sizes occur on the surface of the machined sample. When laser pulses consecutively irradiate the surface, and the previously mentioned physical process repeats, the metallic materials will be removed layer by layer, and a hole appears. In fact, millisecond-pulsed laser drilling uses a laser beam with high power density to produce melting and vaporization to remove material. Therefore, after the analysis of the thermal effect through the thermal stress-coupled field of finite ele- ment, based on the principle of heat conduction, we can con- clude it is feasible to use long-pulse laser to drill hole. Coupling analysis of thermal stress is used to investigate the interaction between two physical fields: heat and stress. This falls into the category of coupling fields. Two methods, the direct method and the indirect method, are available to analyze the coupling field. The direct method means taking the coupling unit with a degree of freedom of temperature and displacement directly, to obtain the result of thermal analysis and structural stress analysis simultaneously. The indirect method uses ther- mal analysis first, and then imposes the node temperature com- puted as the body load on the structural stress analysis. The direct method requires several conditions to produce a balance state and has higher degree of freedom on a node basis and a complicate substrate equation. In addition, compared with the effect of the structural response on the thermal analysis, the temperature derived from the thermal anal- ysis of laser drilling has a stronger effect on the stress strain of the structural analysis. Based on the above considerations, we have chosen the more efficient indi- rect method. The procedure of the simulation analysis involves ANSYS parameter design language finite ele- ment software, which is shown in Fig. 3. It is necessary to simplify the computational model for finite element as laser drilling involves several factors. Our assumptions are described below: Fig. 4 Schematic diagram of the experimental setup Fig. 5 The temperature distribution for MS laser pulse number 25: a oblique view and b vertical view 1874 Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2017) 90:1871–1879

[PAGE 5] a. The energy of the laser beam follows a Gaussian distribu- tion, and the laser intensity remains unchanged from focus to Rayleigh range. b. When the laser beam irradiates materials, the generated plasma affects heat conduction. This effect is ignored. c. When the temperature is climbing, the bond coating layer is oxidized to be a thermally grown oxide (TGO) [14]. Because of its extremely small thickness compared to the substrate materials, the TGO’s effect on drilling is ignored. Millisecond laser drilling in nickel-based alloy with TBCs is a sophisticated process. In order to improve the simulation precision and make the calculation results reflect the experi- mental results as accurately as possible, the selected solution precision was 10E-8. For the finite element simulation, the mesh size needs to be suitable. The temperature change in the millisecond laser radiation region is large, which has a strong effect. Careful mesh refinement can improve solution precision. The diameter of the laser focus simulated in this paper is 240 μm, and the element size is 1 μm. For the thermal stress analysis result solved in this paper, we used a general postprocessor (POST1) to obtain the result curves. The specific steps were as follows: First of all, The stress solution results in X-direction or Y-direction in the graphical window are displayed in form of a cloud atlas. Secondly, to define the route, we take the point with maximum stress at stress concentration part in X-direction or Y-direction in graphical window as the center, then designate the scope of 100 μm in vertical direction of stress distribution belt as the route. In addition, we map the solution results in X-direction or Y-direction in the path and conduct interpolation. At last, the curves about stress changing along the path in X-direction or Y-direction are drawn in the graphical window. 2.2 Experimental setup The laser used in the experiment is the JK300D Nd: YAG solid-state laser produced by Britain GSI, which is dedicated to hole drilling. Additionally, coaxial auxiliary blowing (with compressed air) is applied with the purpose to increase the material removal rate and cooling of the hole wall. This Fig. 6 The stress distribution: a X-direction and b Y-direction Fig. 7 The displacement nephogram: a X-direction and b Y-direction Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2017) 90:1871–1879 1875

[PAGE 6] experiment controls the laser pulse number with a computer and drills into nickel-based alloy with TBCs. The laser param- eters for the experiment are same as for the simulation. A microstructure could be observed and analyzed using scan- ning electron microscope. This study used a HITACHI S-3000N scanning electron microscope, which can amplify 15–300,000 times. A non-conductive ceramic material was used for observation with the electron microscope, after sur- face gold plating. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 4. 3 Results and discussion 3.1 Simulation results Finite element analysis was conducted on the abovementioned models and data in accordance with the flow chart. First, the temperature field was simulated [15, 16]. When the finite el- ement thermal analysis reached the post-processing stage, the simulated results were checked, output, and analyzed in the general postprocessor, to obtain the color isothermal cloud that describes the distribution of the temperature field. The center of the focus area is the highest temperature and appears with an arc and bulged downward. Materials with a tempera- ture exceeding the boiling point vaporizes directly, i.e., it dis- appears during simulation. Therefore, the depth of the focus center increases faster than at other places—see Fig. 5. The following step is transforming analysis type. The node tem- perature computed is taken as the body load and imposed on the structural stress analysis. This way we can produce a stress and displacement cloud chart. From Fig. 6, we can get a clear picture of both the stress concentration in direction X at the hole entrance and of the bonding face of the TBCs and nickel- based alloy. The stress concentration occurs in the di- rection Y on the hole wall that is located deeper in the alloy. Figure 7 shows the X-direction and Y-direction displacement. The largest deformation appears at the position close to the hole entrance, which leads to the appearance of a raised volcanic crater. 3.2 Comparison between experiment and simulation Comparisons between the experiments and simulations are shown in Fig. 8. Figure 8a and Fig. 8b are the cross-sections of microholes. It can be seen that significant melting of the metal occurs under the coating. Figure 9 is a comparison be- tween the simulated and experimental results. Finite element simulation is largely consistent with the experimental results, but there are some deviations due to minimizing and ignoring plasma shielding during laser drilling. Plasma can be pro- duced during a laser drilling process, because when the plas- ma density reaches a certain level, electrons in plasma will absorb the energy of the laser, and part of the laser energy cannot reach the target. Figure 10a and Fig. 10b reveal that a lot of material accu- mulated around the entrance. Ceramic material piled up at the hole edge to form a raised annular crater. Clear cracks appear in the hole. It is found that during laser processing, the ceramic layer generates heat under the laser beam first. The laser will not melt the ceramic layer rapidly because its melting point is as high as 2680 °C. All heat accumulates in the ceramic layer and transfers to the metal basis. However, the melting point Fig. 8 Comparison between the experiment and simulation for MS laser pulse number 25: a SEM image of microhole and b simulation of microhole Fig. 9 Comparison between simulation and experiment 1876 Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2017) 90:1871–1879