[PAGE 1] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 10 / 11 May 2020 / Optics Express 15240 Simulation of ultrashort pulse laser drilling of glass considering heat accumulation CHAORAN WEI, YUSUKE ITO,* RIN SHINOMOTO, KEISUKE NAGATO, AND NAOHIKO SUGITA Department of Mechanical Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan *y.ito@mfg.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp Abstract: In accordance with the increasing demand for high-speed processing, the repetition rate of ultrashort pulse lasers has continued to increase. With the development of these lasers, there is a growing demand for the prediction of shapes processed at high repetition rates. However, the prediction of these shapes is a major challenge, because of the diﬃculty associated with the estimation of heat accumulation. In this study, we developed a simulation of ultrashort laser drilling in glass including heat accumulation calculation between pulses. In this simulation model, temperature is considered as an additional criterion of material removal, thus, the dependency of the repetition rate can be estimated. Two model parameters of laser absorption at high temperatures are investigated and determined by experiments under high environmental temperatures. Using the simulation model, high shape-prediction accuracy at high repetition rates was achieved and validated by comparison with experiments. This study may contribute to broadening the applications of high-repetition-rate ultrashort pulse lasers. © 2020 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement 1. Introduction Glass micromachining is a key part of various processes such as the manufacturing of packages for integrated circuits [1,2] , microﬂuidic biochips [3,4] and optical waveguides [5–7]. In the micromachining of transparent materials such as glass and sapphire, ultrashort pulse lasers are a widespread processing tool that enable precise processing with minimal damage and heat-aﬀected zones [8,9]. The processing result of ultrashort pulse laser is closely related to the processing conditions [10,11]. Therefore, the prediction of machining results under diﬀerent processing conditions is needed. Numerical simulation is the most eﬀective method for shape prediction after ultrashort pulse laser machining and has been studied by a host of researchers [12–17]. Sun et al. succeeded in developing a simulation model for the ultrashort pulse laser drilling of glass utilizing a combination of the beam propagation method (BPM) and rate equation of electron density [18–20]. The BPM is used to calculate the intensity distribution of laser irradiation inside a glass material; the density of electrons can then be calculated from the irradiation intensity using the rate equation of electron density. Electron density is considered as the criterion of material removal in their model, meaning that when the electron density rises over the ablation threshold, the material is considered removed. The model shows high precision in the shape prediction of ultrashort pulse laser drilling. However, using their model, the dependence of the repetition rate cannot be reﬂected, although the repetition rate has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the machining results because of the heat accumulation between laser pulses [21]. Moreover, in recent years, the application of high-repetition-rate pulse laser has become more common due to its high machining eﬃciency [22–25], therefore, it is necessary to consider heat accumulation between pulses [26]. In their simulation model, the electron density and lattice temperature are not associated, which prevents the heat accumulation from being calculated. #390289 https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.390289 Journal © 2020 Received 14 Feb 2020; revised 14 Apr 2020; accepted 27 Apr 2020; published 5 May 2020

[PAGE 2] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 10 / 11 May 2020 / Optics Express 15241 In the present work, we added another material removal criterion, namely, lattice temperature, to the simulation model. This means that other than the electron density, when the temperature rises over the boiling point, the material is also considered removed. To estimate the energy transfer between electrons and phonons, we conducted laser drilling experiments at high environmental temperatures. The experimental results showed that the depth of the drilled holes was dependent on the environmental temperature. These results were then adopted in the simulation model, enabling us to precisely estimate the heat accumulation eﬀect. The improved model was validated by experimental results at a high repetition rate up to 100 kHz. 2. Methods 2.1. Simulation In the simulation model, the BPM is used to calculate the electric ﬁeld as the laser beam propagates into the glass. Assuming that the envelope varies slowly in the z direction, a paraxial Helmholtz equation in a cylindrical coordinate system can be derived as follows: 2ik0 ∂E ∂z = −∂2E ∂r2 −1 r ∂E ∂r −k02 (εr −1) E, (1) where k0 is the wave number of the laser beam, E is the electric ﬁeld and r is the radial distance. In Eq. (1), the relative complex permittivity εr of the material is expressed as εr (ω) = 1 −ρBe2 mε0 ω2 −ω02 −iχω  ω2 −ω02 2 + χ2ω2 , (2) where ρB is the bound electron density, ω is the angular frequency of the laser, me is the eﬀective mass of a quasi-free electron, e is the elementary charge, ε0 is the vacuum dielectric permittivity, ω0 is the frequency of the harmonic oscillators, and χ is the damping constant [27]. The free electron density ρ is calculated based on the rate equation [18,28,29]: ∂ρ ∂t = σIk + αcIρ −ηrecρ2 −ηdiﬀρ, (3) where t is time, I is the intensity, k is the number of photons for multi-photon ionization, σ is the coeﬃcient of multi-photon ionization, αc is the coeﬃcient of cascade ionization, ηrec is the coeﬃcient of recombination, and ηdiﬀis the coeﬃcient of diﬀusion; the distribution of free electron density can be obtained with Eq. (3). The material in the region where the free electron density exceeds the plasma density [28], which is expressed as ρcrit = ω2meε0/e2, is considered to be removed. The energy of the electrons in the unremoved material is then transferred to phonons, causing an increase in lattice temperature, which is expressed as follows [30,31]: ∆T = Eav 3nkB ∫∞ 0  σIk + αcIρ  dt, (4) where Eav is the average electron energy, n is the number of atoms in unit volume, and kB is the Boltzmann constant [32]. The two-temperature model (TTM) is a representative calculating model for the heat-transfer calculation between free electrons and phonons [33–35]. However, in this study, we have assumed that the entire energy of free electrons is transferred to phonons, because the heat capacity of electrons is small compared to that of the lattice [36]. After the energy transfer from free electrons to phonons, the heat diﬀusion process was calculated, because the electron-phonon relaxation time is negligible compared with the time scale of the heat diﬀusion process [37].

[PAGE 3] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 10 / 11 May 2020 / Optics Express 15242 The damping constant χ in Eq. (2) is a key factor in the model as it describes the relationship between the dielectric properties and the free electron density. In previous studies, χ is usually given by: χ = χmax ρmax ρmax + βρcrit , (5) where ρmax is the maximum free-electron density at each position within one pulse duration and χmax is the maximum value of the damping constant [18]. The ρmax is calculated from the temporal course of the laser intensity using Eq. (3). β is a model parameter determined by the laser processing experiments [38]. In our study, we added another model parameter to this model to increase its ﬂexibility. In this model, χ is given by χ = χmax ρα max ραmax + βρα crit , (6) where α and β are model parameters to be determined. The relative complex permittivity of the material under diﬀerent free electron densities can be then calculated via Eq. (2) and Eq. (6). From the obtained temperature distribution, the material in the region where the temperature exceeds the boiling point, is considered to be removed by evaporation. The heat diﬀusion process between pulses is then calculated via the commercial ﬁnite element method (FEM) software ABAQUS (Dassault Systemes). Axial symmetrical model was used for the calculation. The shape of the model was calculated from the BPM simulation. Temperature dependent speciﬁc heat capacity and thermal conductivity were used. The temperature ﬁeld obtained from the free electron density was used as the predeﬁned ﬁeld. Heat transfer in the form of radiation and thermal conduction at the top and bottom surface of the sample was taken into consideration. Emissivity was set to 0.95 and the heat transfer coeﬃcient was set to 5 W/(m2 K). Environmental temperature was set to 25 °C. As for the boundary condition, the side surface perpendicular to the top surface was set as an isothermal wall with 25 °C. The temperature distribution after the heat diﬀusion and the drilled shape are then used for the calculation of the next laser pulse and, the eﬀect of the heat accumulation can be taken into account. 2.2. Experiment The model works correctly only when proper values of the two model parameters α and β are determined. We estimated α and β by conducting the drilling experiment at high environmental temperatures. Figure 1 shows the experimental setup. An aluminosilicate glass sample (AGC; AN100) was clamped and heated by a ceramic heater (Sakaguchi; MS–5). The temperature of the ceramic heater was measured by a thermocouple. The ceramic heater and thermocouple were both connected to a temperature controller (Misumi; MTCS), allowing us to stabilize the temperature of the ceramic heater with feedback control. The temperature range of the ceramic heater was up to 500 °C. The sample and ceramic heater were surrounded by an insulator to reduce heat loss. The glass sample partially protruded from the ceramic heater so that the sample was exposed to the laser pulses. A Ti:Sapphire femtosecond laser was used for the drilling experiment. The pulse width of the laser pulses was 228 fs, repetition rate was 1 kHz, wavelength was 514 nm, and pulse energy was 25 µJ. When the temperature of the ceramic heater was stabilized, indicating that the temperature of the glass sample was also stabilized, multiple laser pulses were then focused on the surface of the sample with a spot diameter of 13.6 µm using an objective lens (Mitsutoyo; M Plan Apo NIR 5×) with a focal length of 40 mm to drill holes. The location where the laser pulses were focused was 1 mm away from the edge of the ceramic heater. After the experiment, drilled holes were observed by an optical microscope.

[PAGE 4] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 10 / 11 May 2020 / Optics Express 15243 Fig. 1. (a) Illustration of the experimental setup. (b) Actual experimental setup. We measured the temperature at the location where laser pulses were focused using a thermography (Nippon Avionics; InfRec R300) so that the temperature of the ceramic heater and that of the processed area were associated. One of the pictures taken by the thermography is shown in Fig. 2(a). The temperature distribution of the area, which is 1 mm away from the ceramic heater (the area surrounded by the rectangle with a white solid line in Fig. 2(a)), is shown in Fig. 2(b), where Tc is the temperature of the ceramic heater. Here, we assumed that the temperature between the two orange dotted lines is approximately uniform. Therefore, we calculated the average within this region and considered it to be the temperature of the processed region. Fig. 2. (a) Thermography of the heated sample. (b) Temperature distribution of the measured region 3. Results and discussion The model parameters α and β signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the performance of the model. The temperature distributions after the ﬁrst laser pulse was focused, calculated with diﬀerent values of α and β, are shown in Fig. 3.

[PAGE 5] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 10 / 11 May 2020 / Optics Express 15244 Fig. 3. Dependence of simulated temperature distribution after one pulse on values of (a) α and (b) β. (c) Comparison of temperature distribution with diﬀerent conditions that allow for similar drilled-hole depths. (Left: depth = 0.626 µm, right: depth = 0.680 µm) Both the changes of α (Fig. 3(a)) and β (Fig. 3(b)) have similar eﬀects on the damping constant χ; as the value of α or β increases, χ decreases, and, therefore, the penetration depth of the laser pulse increases. As the inner area is heated with a larger α or β, the depth of the hole drilled by one pulse increases, as shown in Table 1. These results validated the increase of the model ﬂexibility. As an example, with diﬀerent values of α and β, the results of temperature distribution were diﬀerent as compared in Fig. 3(c); however, the results of the hole depths can be similar as shown in Table 1. The hole depths were 0.626 µm when α = 5.0 and β = 0.01, and 0.680 µm when α = 2.0 and β = 1.0. Table 1. Simulated depth [µm] of holes drilled by one laser pulse, with different values of α and β. The results of the drilling experiment are shown in Fig. 4. The depth of the drilled holes increased as the environmental temperature rose. Here, we considered that the ﬁnal temperature diﬀerence of the material was resulted from the diﬀerence of initial temperature (environmental temperature). If the initial temperature is higher, there would be more volume of the material reaching the boiling point (criteria of removal) and considered removed, causing the increase of drilling depth. The absorption coeﬃcient of the material at 25 °C and higher temperature (up to 370 °C) are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent [39]. Therefore, it is appropriate to consider that the material absorbed almost the same energy from the laser irradiation at diﬀerent environmental temperature (up to 370 °C), indicating that the temperature increments of the material should be nearly the same, although the increments could be slightly diﬀerent due to the diﬀerent speciﬁc heat capacity at diﬀerent temperature. To ﬁt the experimental results of hole diameter and depth shown in Fig. 5(a), two model parameters α = 4.6 and β = 0.1 were selected. The results of the simulation under diﬀerent environmental temperatures are shown in Fig. 5(b) and compared with experimental results in

[PAGE 6] Research Article Vol. 28, No. 10 / 11 May 2020 / Optics Express 15245 Fig. 4. (a) Shape of holes drilled by 100 pulses at diﬀerent environmental temperatures. (b) Depth of drilled holes at diﬀerent environmental temperatures. Fig. 5(c). The conditions of laser irradiation used in the simulation were the same as those used in the experiments. The simulation results agree with the experimental results when the environmental temperature was 200 °C or lower. When the environmental temperature was over 300 °C, the simulation could not reproduce the results of the experiment, because the melted material caused the instability of drilled shape. The diameter near the top of the hole was slightly diﬀerent from the experimental result, presumably because the reﬂow and resolidiﬁcation were not taken into consideration in our simulation model. Fig. 5. (a) Shape of holes drilled by 50 pulses at diﬀerent environmental temperatures. (b) Shape and temperature distribution of holes drilled by 50 pulses at diﬀerent environmental temperatures. (c) Depth comparison of experiment and simulation after 50 pulses at diﬀerent environmental temperatures. The distribution of laser intensity, distribution of free electron density and temporal course of the temperature distribution after the 100th pulse are shown in Fig. 6. The non-uniform initial temperature distribution (shown in Fig. 6(c) at 0.0 µs) was resulted from non-uniform distribution of laser intensity inside the sample (shown in Fig. 6(a)) and distribution of free electron density (shown in Fig. 6(b)), which were calculated by the BPM simulation. The others were the results of heat diﬀusion simulation. Until 0.1 ms after the pulse, the heat was not diﬀused completely. However, at 1 ms after the pulse, there was little heat left, indicating that if the repetition rate of the laser was lower than 1 kHz, the eﬀect of heat accumulation was small.