[PAGE 1] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 116 (2024) 77–91 Available online 26 February 2024 1526-6125/© 2024 The Society of Manufacturing Engineers. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Size effect of femtosecond laser helical drilling on nickel-based single crystal superalloy Meng Li a, Zhixun Wen a,*, Ping Wang b, Zhenwei Li a,b,**, Guangxian Lu a, Yuxing Liu a, Zhufeng Yue a a State Key Laboratory of Clean and Efficient Turbomachinery Power Equipment, School of Mechanics, Civil Engineering and Architecture, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, PR China b School of Aerospace Engineering and Applied Mechanics, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, PR China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Femtosecond laser drilling Size effects Film cooling holes (FCHs) Surface quality A B S T R A C T Femtosecond laser has gradually become a reliable tool for processing high-quality film cooling holes (FCHs) of turbine blades in recent years. However, in the case of turbine blades with a variety of aperture drilling re­ quirements, the influence of aperture on drilling quality and its internal causes are ignored. In this paper, the “size effect” of different aperture holes prepared by femtosecond laser helical drilling method was analyzed and compared in terms of geometric features, machining efficiency, hole wall ablation and drilling evolution process, and the formation mechanism of the “size effect” were revealed from the aspects of removal efficiency, laser spot overlap rate, energy shielding effect and residues discharge capacity. The results show that with the increase of laser scanning diameter D, the taper of the hole increases, the drilling efficiency increases first and then de­ creases, and the surface of hole wall is transformed from microvoids, microcracks and adhesive oxide residues into a regular nanostripes. The increase of D makes the radial spot overlap rate Pr decrease significantly, and Pr seriously affects the removal efficiency and thermal effect on the hole wall, which should be adjusted according to different apertures. Thermal accumulation and laser energy utilization rate attenuation caused by the energy shielding effect are the most important factors that deteriorate the processing quality and reduce the processing efficiency during femtosecond helical drilling. Therefore, for smaller aperture drilling, the strategy of process adjustment is to increase residues discharge capacity. 1. Introduction Increasing the entrance temperature of turbine is one of the most efficacious technical ways to improve the power, thermal efficiency and thrust-to-weight ratio of the gas turbine engine [1]. Therefore, nickel- based superalloys with excellent high-temperature performance are widely used in the high-pressure turbine blades of all advanced gas turbine engines [2,3]. However, it is still difficult to meet the increasing temperature demand of turbine entrance only by relying on heat- resistant materials. Therefore, film cooling technology has been devel­ oped to further improve the high temperature resistance of turbine blades. [4]. The principle of film cooling technology is to spray cold air from the dense holes on the surface of the cavity turbine blades, and form a cold air film with lower temperature on the surface of blades to isolate the blades wall from the high temperature gas to protect the turbine blade [5]. Although the film cooling technology effectively im­ proves the service temperature of turbine blades, it destroys the struc­ tural integrity of blades, and film cooling holes (FCHs) are prone to initiate cracks as a stress concentration site, resulting in blades failure [6]. Furthermore, the defects such as recast layer, microvoids and microcracks caused by poor drilling methods increase the failure risk from FCHs [7]. Therefore, it is of great significance for the safe operation of gas turbine engines to explore high-quality FCHs drilling technology and analyze the phenomena and internal mechanisms in the drilling process. Different from the traditional drilling methods such as mechanical drilling, electrical discharge drilling, electrochemical drilling and long pulse laser drilling [8–10], femtosecond laser drilling has many * Corresponding author. ** Corresponding author at: State Key Laboratory of Clean and Efficient Turbomachinery Power Equipment, School of Mechanics, Civil Engineering and Archi­ tecture, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, PR China. E-mail addresses: zxwen@nwpu.edu.cn (Z. Wen), zwli@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (Z. Li). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Manufacturing Processes journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/manpro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2024.02.041 Received 13 October 2023; Received in revised form 16 January 2024; Accepted 17 February 2024

[PAGE 2] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 116 (2024) 77–91 78 advantages such as minimal thermal impact, high precision and flexi­ bility due to its ultra-fast effect with materials and non-contact machining, and has become the most promising turbine blades drilling technology [11,12]. Earlier studies have proved the possibility and applicability of femtosecond laser drilling technology on turbine blade materials [13,14]. In recent years, the research on femtosecond laser drilling of turbine blade materials mainly includes process methods such as per­ cussion drilling, trepanning drilling and helical drilling, the influence of process parameters, the effect of environmental variables such as ul­ trasonic energy field, magnetic field and water medium, the influence of laser characteristics such as energy distribution, polarization state and pulse width, the optimization of process parameters and the physical mechanism of laser and material. Wang et al. [15] used three different femtosecond laser drilling methods, percussion drilling, trepanning drilling and helical drilling, to process FCHs in K24 superalloy. The re­ sults show that the helical drilling method has the advantages of good roundness and minimal thermal impact compared with the other two drilling methods. Zhang et al. [16] studied the effects of femtosecond laser scanning path and machining parameters on the geometric accu­ racy and surface quality of FCHs machined on nickel-based single crystal superalloys, and analyzed the influence mechanism of machining pa­ rameters on geometric accuracy. Li et al. [17] studied the surface morphology of nickel-based superalloys under femtosecond laser per­ cussion drilling based on the influence of laser irradiation intensity and pulse number on the ablation process, and found that laser-induced plasma and uneven pressure gradient in the hole have adverse effects on the quality of the hole. Xia et al. [18] compared and analyzed the effects of different environments (in air, magnetic assistance, water assistance and water-based magnetic assistance) on the hole morphology, hole diameter, taper angle and sidewall roughness after femtosecond laser drilling and found that the water-based magnetic assisted drilling method could improve the hole drilling efficiency and quality. Qiu et al. [19] used YVO4 crystal to decompose a femtosecond single pulse into two vertically polarized femtosecond sub-pulses. The drilling test in nickel-based superalloys showed that orthogonally polarized femtosecond double-pulse bursts enhanced the ablation rate and eliminated the polarization removal caused by the difference in reflectivity between p- and s-polarized light, which improved the uni­ formity of the sidewall and the consistency of the entrance and exit of the hole. Zhang et al. [20] established an optimal design model based on machine learning and high-throughput genetic algorithm, and obtained the optimal solution for low-power femtosecond laser drilling in nickel- based single crystal superalloys. Wang et al. [21] proposed a femto­ second laser machining process optimization framework that combines molecular dynamics, machine learning, and high-throughput optimiza­ tion algorithms. The framework was successfully applied to femtosecond laser percussion drilling on nickel-based single crystal superalloys, which improved the drilling efficiency and quality. Zhang et al. [22,23] analyzed the cluster behavior in the process of femtosecond laser abla­ tion of nickel-based single crystal superalloys by using molecular dy­ namics (MD) simulation method, and also used the MD method coupled with the two-temperature (TM) model to simulate the process of single pulse 500 fs laser melting and ablation of Ni3Al at the atomic level, revealing the interrelated complex processes and physical mechanisms. The above experimental and theoretical studies provide a valuable reference for femtosecond laser drilling FCHs of turbine blades. How­ ever, the existing researches ignore one of the simplest and most prac­ tical factors in the femtosecond laser drilling-machining aperture. Due to the different types and sizes of turbine blades, as well as the differ­ ences in aerodynamic and cooling design, FCHs of turbine blades often have the machining requirements of various apertures. It is difficult to ensure that the machining parameters obtained for specific apertures are suitable for other apertures. Moreover, there are significant differences in the geometric features and surface integrity of holes during femto­ second helical drilling process, showing a distinctive “size effect”, which is not caused by specific processing parameters. The direct adverse effect of this “size effect” in femtosecond helical drilling is that it increases the difficulty for technicians and researchers to obtain suitable process pa­ rameters adapted to a wide range of apertures. And the more practical disadvantage is that the poor geometric accuracy and surface defects caused by poor drilling process parameters will damage the service performance and safety of turbine blades. Therefore, in this paper, aiming at the “size effect” of femtosecond helical drilling, firstly, holes with different apertures are processed on nickel-based single crystal superalloys, and then the drilling results are measured and characterized in detail from the aspects of geometric features, machining efficiency, hole wall profile, hole wall ablation and drilling evolution process, so as to obtain the multi-faceted and multi- scale characteristics of holes with different apertures processed by femtosecond laser helical drilling. Finally, the causes and internal mechanisms of this “size effect” are explained from the aspects of removal efficiency, laser spot overlap rate, energy shielding effect and residue discharge ability. This study can provide theoretical support and Table 1 The nominal chemical composition of the test alloy (wt%). C Cr Ni Co W Mo Al Ti Ta Re Nb B Si Hf 0.015 4.0 Bal. 9.0 8.0 2.0 5.7 ≤0.10 7.0 2.2 1.0 ≤0.02 ≤0.02 1.0 Fig. 1. (a) The dendrite morphology and (b) γ/γˊ two-phase microstructure of the test alloy. M. Li et al.

[PAGE 3] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 116 (2024) 77–91 79 process parameter adjustment strategy for femtosecond laser helical drilling method to drill FCHs with various apertures. 2. Experimental procedures 2.1. Experimental material The material used for drilling is a nickel-based single crystal super­ alloy DD6, which is widely used in high pressure turbine blades of gas turbine engines, and its main elements are shown in Table 1. The test alloy was cast by directional solidification process, and its growth di­ rection was controlled to be [001] crystal orientation by spiral grain selection method. Through metallographic analysis, the original struc­ ture of the experimental alloy is a dendrite structure parallel to the [001] orientation (Fig. 1(a)), and both the dendrite and interdendrites is a regular microstructure composed of γ and γˊ phases (Fig. 1(b)). Considering the crystal orientation and wall thickness of hollow turbine blades, the sample for drilling is a rectangular sheet sample with a thickness of 1.5 mm, and the length direction of the rectangular sample is parallel to the crystal orientation [001]. 2.2. Femtosecond laser drilling system The femtosecond laser drilling system is shown in Fig. 2(a). A Gaussian femotosecond laser pulses is generated by a solid-state Yb: KGW laser generator, emitting at a wave length of 1030 nm with the pulse duration of 220 fs and a repetition frequency of 100 kHz. The detailed parameters of the laser generator are shown in Table 2. The laser beam is transmitted to the laser machining head after increasing the energy through the amplifier, and then the laser scanning trajectory is accurately controlled by the laser helical scanning machining head. In the process of drilling, the workpiece is fixed on the five-axis mobile platform with a fixture, the drilling position is positioned and focused by a position camera and laser range finder, and the machining status is monitored in real time by a charge coupled device (CCD). The high- pressure air coaxial with the laser beam is blown to the machining area through the air nozzle to promote the discharge of the removed material (Fig. 2(b)). The laser machining head is mainly composed of a small angle wedge group, a parallel plate and a focusing mirror. By adjusting the phase angle of the wedge group, concentric circle scanning with different scanning diameters D and different scanning circles R can be realized (Fig. 2(c)). The optical principle of the laser machining head is shown in reference [24]. The detailed parameters of the laser machining head are shown in Table 2, and the processing parameters are determined by referring to the good process interval obtained in previ­ ous work [24]. Fig. 3 shows the relationship between the D and the phase angle of the wedge group. Different D can be achieved by selecting the phase angle through interpolation. 2.3. Characterization of drilling results The CCD module of the femtosecond laser drilling system is used to observe the drilling process in real time. After the hole is pierced, the machining is stopped and the machining time is recorded. The observed samples were ultrasonically cleaned using acetone and alcohol, respec­ tively. For the samples used to observe the hole profile, wire cutting is first performed near the hole circumference, and then the cut samples are carefully ground with 1200-mesh SiC sandpaper until the hole profile is fully exposed, and finally ultrasonic cleaning is performed. Optical microscope (OM) is used to observe the macroscopic morphology of the hole wall and measure the entrance and exit aperture of holes. After obtaining the aperture data, the taper of the hole is calculated by Eq. (1). Five drilling tests were performed for different D to reduce the error and ensure the accuracy of the test results. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to observe the microstructures of holes profiles. Energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) was used to detect the chemical composition of holes walls and analyze the degree of ablation. The calculation formula of hole taper α is: α = arctan (d1 −d2 2h ) (1) In the formula, d1 is the entrance aperture, d2 is the exit aperture, and h is the thickness of the workpiece. Fig. 2. (a) A femtosecond helical drilling system, (b) the enlarged image of the machining area during drilling, (c) helical scanning trajectory diagram. Table 2 Test machining parameters. Machining Parameters Values Laser output power(P) 12 w Laser single pulse energy(Epulse) 120 μJ Laser wavelength 1030 nm Pulse duration 220 fs Pulse repetition frequency(f) 100 kHz Beam quality TEM00(M2 < 1.2) Beam waist after focus 23 μm Polarization Linear, horizontal Rotation speed of helical scan module 2400 rpm Dwell time of single-layer scanning (T) 500 ms Amount of focal plane drop for single-layer scanning (H) 0.010 mm Starting scanning diameter (Ds) 0.235 mm Target scanning diameter (D) 0.3 mm ~ 0.9 mm Number of scanning cycles from Ds to D (R) 20 r Air-blowing pressure 0.7 Mpa Fig. 3. The relationship between D and phase angle of optical wedge group. M. Li et al.

[PAGE 4] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 116 (2024) 77–91 80 3. Results 3.1. Geometric features and machining efficiency The entrance and exit morphologies of holes drilled with different D are shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the entrance and exit of holes can maintain good roundness, and there are no obvious defects on the sur­ face around holes. The measurement results of the entrance and exit apertures are shown in Fig. 5(a). With the increase of D, the diameters of the entrance and exit of the hole increase gradually. The entrance diameter of the hole under different D can reach the accurate target diameter. However, when D > 0.5 mm, with the increase of D, the dif­ ference between the exit diameter and the target diameter gradually increases. The calculation results of the taper of the hole are shown in Fig. 5(b). From the figure, it can be seen that D = 0.5 mm is a critical value, and when D ≤0.5 mm, the taper of the hole is minimal, and when D > 0.5 mm, the taper of the hole rapidly increases. The statistical results of machining time are shown in Fig. 5(c). With the increase of D, the Fig. 4. The entrance and exit morphologies of holes with different D. Fig. 5. (a) The entrance and exit apertures, (b) taper and (c) machining time with different D. M. Li et al.

[PAGE 5] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 116 (2024) 77–91 81 Fig. 6. Macroscopic morphologies of holes profiles with different D. Fig. 7. The micromorphologies of the upper, middle and lower regions of holes walls with different D. M. Li et al.

[PAGE 6] Journal of Manufacturing Processes 116 (2024) 77–91 82 drilling time decreases first and then increases. When D = 0.7 mm, the required machining time is the least. 3.2. Hole profile morphology The macroscopic morphologies of holes profiles with different D is shown in Fig. 6. When D = 0.3– 0.5 mm, there are a large amount of gray black residues and melts adhered to holes walls, and there are defects on the contour of holes profiles, especially when D is 0.3 mm, the contour of the hole profile is irregular, and the aperture becomes larger in some areas. When D > 0.5 mm, except for a small amount of residues adhered to holes walls at holes entrances, most of areas of holes walls show a bright metal color, and contours of holes profiles are regular. In addi­ tion, there are obvious groove structures in the middle and lower parts of holes walls with different D. In order to observe holes walls after femtosecond laser helical dril­ ling in more detail, the local microstructure of the upper, middle and lower parts of holes walls with D of 0.3/0.5/0.7/0.9 mm were observed, as shown in Fig. 7. In general, with the increase of D, the difference in the micromorphologies of the upper, middle and lower regions of holes walls gradually decrease, and the qualities of holes walls are signifi­ cantly improved. When D is 0.3 mm (Fig. 7(a)), the surface of the hole wall is the worst. A large number of residues are adhered to the upper part of the hole wall, and a large number of microvoids appear. Blocky melts, microvoids and microcracks are observed in the middle of the hole wall. The quality of the lower part of the hole wall is improved, but there are also obvious microvoids in some areas. When D is 0.5 mm (Fig. 7(b)), a large number of flaky residues are adhered to the upper part of the hole wall, and there are a small number of microvoids. In the middle of the hole wall, jagged boundaries of thermal and non-thermal effects with a large number of microvoids and microcracks were observed. There are flaky residues above the boundary and clean sur­ faces below the boundary. The lower part of the hole wall is similar to that of D = 0.3 mm, but the sizes of microvoids and microcracks are larger. When D is 0.7/0.9 mm (Fig. 7(c) (d)), the consistencies of holes walls are better. Except for a small amount of flaky and granular residues in the upper area, the other areas show a regular nanostripes structure. 3.3. Ablation analysis of hole wall It can be seen from the microscopic morphologies of holes walls in the Section 3.2 that holes walls after femtosecond laser helical drilling mainly have some characteristic morphologies: melts, flaky residues, granular residues, microvoids, microcracks and nanostripes. Therefore, Fig. 8. EDS scanning results of melts in the middle of the hole wall when D = 0.3 mm. M. Li et al.