[PAGE 1] ORIGINAL ARTICLE Strengthening of defected beam–column joints using CFRP Mohamed H. Mahmoud, Hamdy M. Afefy *, Nesreen M. Kassem, Tarek M. Fawzy Structural Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt A R T I C L E I N F O Article history: Received 15 July 2012 Received in revised form 11 November 2012 Accepted 22 November 2012 Available online 11 January 2013 Keywords: Beam–column joint Carbon ﬁber reinforced polymer (CFRP) Defects Near surface mounted (NSM) Reinforced concrete Strengthening A B S T R A C T This paper presents an experimental study for the structural performance of reinforced concrete (RC) exterior beam–column joints rehabilitated using carbon-ﬁber-reinforced polymer (CFRP). The present experimental program consists of testing 10 half-scale specimens divided into three groups covering three possible defects in addition to an adequately detailed control specimen. The considered defects include the absence of the transverse reinforcement within the joint core, insufﬁcient bond length for the beam main reinforcement and inadequate spliced implanted col- umn on the joint. Three different strengthening schemes were used to rehabilitate the defected beam–column joints including externally bonded CFRP strips and sheets in addition to near surface mounted (NSM) CFRP strips. The failure criteria including ultimate capacity, mode of failure, initial stiffness, ductility and the developed ultimate strain in the reinforcing steel and CFRP were considered and compared for each group for the control and the CFRP- strengthened specimens. The test results showed that the proposed CFRP strengthening conﬁg- urations represented the best choice for strengthening the ﬁrst two defects from the viewpoint of the studied failure criteria. On the other hand, the results of the third group showed that strengthening the joint using NSM strip technique enabled the specimen to outperform the structural performance of the control specimen while strengthening the joints using externally bonded CFRP strips and sheets failed to restore the strengthened joints capacity. ª 2014 Cairo University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Introduction Occasionally, long after the structure has been completed, it is discovered that a contractor has left out some steel or some de- tails are inadequately executed or the concrete is not what was speciﬁed. Fiber reinforced polymer, FRP, can be used in order to replace the missing steel or compensate the low concrete strength or structural faults in design. That is because FRP in the form of plates or fabric sheet has its strength in the direc- tion of the ﬁbers only and can be engineered to place the strengthening in the needed direction only. It addition, it can * Corresponding author. Tel.: +20 3 429 8793, mobile: +20 106 177 3174; fax: +20 3 428 3180. E-mail address: hamdyafefy@hotmail.com (H.M. Afefy). Peer review under responsibility of Cairo University. Journal of Advanced Research (2014) 5, 67–77 Cairo University Journal of Advanced Research 2090-1232 ª 2014 Cairo University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2012.11.007

[PAGE 2] provide an improved load carrying capacity and a higher rate of stiffness than that of un-strengthened specimens [1]. FRP composites have become more popular in the last two decades due to the reduction in their cost, combined with new- er understanding of the versatility and beneﬁts of the material properties. CFRP strips and fabric are generally constructed of high-performance carbon ﬁbers which are placed in resin ma- trix. These composites can easily be externally bonded to RC elements. Strengthening with ﬁber-reinforced polymeric com- posite applications is one of the recent retroﬁtting and strengthening techniques [2]. The beam–column joint is considered as the most critical zone in a reinforced concrete moment resisting frame. It is sub- jected to large forces during earthquake excitation and its behavior has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the response of the en- tire structure. As a result, a great attention has to be paid for good detailing of such joint. The absence of transverse rein- forcement in the joint, insufﬁcient development length for the beam reinforcement and the inadequately spliced reinforce- ment for the column just above the joint can be considered as the most important causes for the failure of the beam–column joint under any unexpected transverse loading on the building. Antonopoulos and Triantaﬁllou [3] demonstrated that exter- nally bonded FRP reinforcement is a practical solution to- wards enhancing the strength, energy dissipation, and stiffness characteristics of poorly detailed, in shear, RC joints subjected to simulated seismic loads. Abdel-Wahed et al. [4] studied experimentally and analytically different CFRP strengthening conﬁgurations for beam–column joints having inadequate transverse reinforcement in the joint. In the literature, many researches had been conducted experimentally in order to address the effectiveness of using FRP laminates for the strengthening of beam–column joints [5–9]. In addition, Ravi and Arulraj [10] studied numerically the behavior of beam–column joints retroﬁtted with carbon ﬁ- ber reinforced polymer sheets. In the continuation, the effec- tiveness of composite ﬁber reinforced polymer layers for exterior beam–column connections was studied numerically considering strength and ductility enhancement of the RC joints [11]. Despite the fact that the defect of inadequate transverse reinforcement in the beam–column joint has been studied extensively in literature, other defects have to be studied in de- tails. The current study conducts an experimental investigation on different strengthening conﬁgurations using CFRP for three defects encountered in the detailing of the exterior beam–column joints. In addition to the defect caused by the absence of transverse reinforcement in the beam–column joint, the insufﬁcient bond length for the beam main reinforcement and inadequately spliced implanted column were also studied. Strengthening material One of the most important factors affecting the successful strengthening technique of structures is the selection of the strengthening material. The need to lower the cost of mainte- nance, repair and strengthening techniques, while extending the service life of the structures, has resulted in new systems, processes, or products to save money and time. The ﬁber-rein- forced polymer (FRP) systems are recently used in the ﬁeld of strengthening and restoration of the buildings. The most com- monly utilized ﬁber-reinforced polymers (FRPs) are ﬁbers made of carbon (C) or glass (G). These materials can be de- signed and used in the form of laminates, rods, dry ﬁbers (sheets) adhesively bonded to the concrete, wet lay-up sheets mounted on the surface, or near surface mounted bars or lam- inate strips in the concrete cover [12]. The carbon ﬁber-rein- forced polymer (CFRP) materials have a high potential for manufacturing effective strengthening systems to increase the ﬂexural or shear strength of RC beams. The CFRP materials have a very low weight to volume ratio, are immune to corro- sion, and possess high tensile strength. FRP systems may have thermal expansion properties that are different from those of concrete. In the ﬁber direction, CFRP systems have a coefﬁ- cient of thermal expansion near zero, however previous re- search work [13] has indicated that the thermal expansion differences do not affect the bonding for small ranges of tem- perature change (+/50 C). Also, due to their electrical con- ductivity, Ghali et al. [14] concluded that carbon based FRP materials should not come in direct contact with steel to avoid potential galvanic corrosion of steel reinforcement and, a min- imum concrete cover of about 10 mm was recommended. The performance of the FRP system over time in an alka- line or acidic environment depends on the matrix material and the reinforcing ﬁber. Unprotected carbon ﬁber resists both alkali and acid environments while bare glass ﬁber can degrade over time in these environments [15]. However, a properly ap- plied resin matrix may isolate and protect the ﬁber from the alkaline/acidic environment and retard deterioration. Compared to the traditional strengthening techniques (externally bonded steel plates, near surface mounted steel bars and concrete jackets), the cost of the externally bonded CFRP system is relatively high but, in some special circumstances, and regarding the aforementioned advantages, the choice of the CFRP as a strengthening material may represent the best solution. Experimental Test specimens A total of eleven half-scale beam–column T-joints were pre- pared and cast in the current study. The ﬁrst specimen, J0, was considered as the base control specimen. It had an ex- truded beam of 900 mm length and cross-sectional dimensions of 200 · 300 mm. This beam was connected to a column at its mid-height point. The cross-section of the column was 200 · 300 mm. The total length of the columns was 2.3 m di- vided into two equal parts, lower part and upper part. The upper and lower reinforcement of the beam in addition to the main longitudinal steel reinforcement of the column were made from high tensile steel. The main steel reinforce- ment of the beam was three bars of 16 mm diameter, while the secondary steel reinforcement was two bars of 12 mm diameter. On the other hand, the column was reinforced with four bars of 16 mm diameter at each corner of the column cross-section. The stirrups for both beam and column were mild steel bars of 8 mm diameter and spaced every 100 mm and 150 mm for the beam and the column, respectively. In addition, three stirrups were added at the beam–column joint. Fig. 1 shows the concrete dimensions and reinforcement detail- ing for the base control specimen provided that the loading 68 M.H. Mahmoud et al.

[PAGE 3] direction on the beam end was acted at the bottom side accord- ing to the adopted testing setup. The remaining 10 specimens were divided into three groups representing the considered three defects as shown in Fig. 2. The ﬁrst group, group #1, contained three specimens: JI0, JI1, and JI2, representing the reference specimen and two strengthening conﬁgurations, respectively. This group repre- sented the ﬁrst defect which was the absence of the stirrups at the beam–column joint. Group #2 represented the defect of insufﬁcient bond length for the beam main steel reinforce- ment. This group contained three specimens: JII0, JII1, and JII2 representing the reference specimen for such group and two strengthening conﬁgurations, respectively. Group #3 rep- resented the third defect that was deﬁciently executed im- planted column on an old one. This group contained four specimens that were one reference specimen along with three different strengthening conﬁgurations. Fig. 3 represents the three defects of the beam–column joints. Group #3 was exe- cuted in three steps: the ﬁrst step was the casting of the lower column along with the extruded beam monolithically. The sec- ond step was the drilling of four 50 mm depth holes to accom- modate the longitudinal steel reinforcement for the upper column then the holes were ﬁlled with epoxy to hold the steel bars in their positions. The third step was the preparing of the surface of old concrete then casting the upper column as shown in Fig. 4. All specimens were cast horizontally in wooden forms. Two days after casting, the standard cubes and the sides of the spec- imens were stripped from the molds and covered in wet Hes- sian until the seventh day, when the Hessian was removed and the specimens allowed air-drying until testing. Strengthening scheme In accordance with ACI 440 [15] recommendations, seven specimens were strengthened with either CFRP fabric or CFRP strips as shown in Fig. 2. Based on the failure patterns of the base control specimen and the reference specimens in- cluded into the three groups, the strengthening conﬁgurations were proposed. For both group #1 and group #2, two strengthening conﬁgurations were proposed, while three con- ﬁgurations were considered for group #3. For group #1, the ﬁrst strengthening conﬁguration repre- sented two perpendicular overlaying fabric sheets on the beam–column joint. One layer of 200 mm width and 1000 mm length parallel to the column axis was bonded to each side of the column. Then a horizontal U-shaped layer of 200 mm width and extended by 600 mm length parallel to the beam axis was bonded to each side. Finally, three 100 mm in width U-shaped sheets were used at the joint in order to prevent the premature peeling of the sheets at the 0.30 1.00 1.00 0.90 2.30 Loading Direction 0.30 0.20 4 16 7 8 /m Column cross-section 2 12 3 16 2 16 2 16 0.20 0.30 10 8 /m 2 12 3 16 Beam cross-section 0.30 3 8 Fig. 1 Concrete dimensions and reinforcement details for the base control specimen, J0. Strengthening of defected beam–column joints using CFRP 69

[PAGE 4] Fig. 2 Schematic representation for the considered three groups. .050 Defect of group #1 Defect of group #3 Defect of group #2 Strain gauge (MS beam) Strain gauge (MS column) Strain gauge (MS beam) Strain gauge (MS column) Strain gauge (MS beam) Strain gauge (MS column) Strain gauge (Stirrup) Strain gauge (Stirrup) Strain gauge (Column 2) Fig. 3 Details of the three defects. 70 M.H. Mahmoud et al.

[PAGE 5] beam–column joint [16,17]. The three anchorages U-shaped sheets were bonded in the transverse direction of the beam at the column face and in the transverse direction of the column just below and up the beam faces. The second conﬁguration represented a 45 inclined one layer of a 500 mm wide U- shaped bonded at each side covering the beam–column joint. As for group#2, the ﬁrst strengthening conﬁguration repre- sented four layers of 100 mm wide sheets in the form of U- shape that were bonded to the lower side of the beam parallel to its axis. The sheets were designed to compensate the main steel of the beam with an efﬁciency factor of 0.5. These sheets were placed so that they covered the column width and ran up both sides of the beam to a length of 1000 mm. 100 mm in width U-shaped sheet was used at the end of the horizontal layers in order to prevent the premature peeling of the sheets. The second conﬁguration represented two 200 mm in width L- shaped sheets bonded to the lower face of the beam and ex- tended by 300 mm in the direction of the lower column. Three 100 mm width U-shaped anchorage strips were used at the free end of the sheet, the beam at the column face and the lower column at the beam face, respectively. Three strengthening conﬁgurations were used in group #3 making use of CFRP fabric sheets and CFRP plates. The most important criterion for the three conﬁgurations was that the area of either CFRP plates or the fabric sheet was the same. The ﬁrst conﬁguration represented near-surface mounted, NSM. NSM FRP technique does not require extensive surface preparation work and, after groove cutting, requires minimal installation time compared to externally bonded FRP lami- nates [18]. Three CFRP strips inserted into grooves cut at the outer surface of the column were used. The strips, as pro- vided by the manufacturer have a nominal width of 50 mm and a total thickness of 1.2 mm. In order to insert the strips within a typical concrete cover used for concrete members, the strips were cut into three equal parts each, 16.6 mm wide. Using a concrete saw, approximately 5 mm wide and 17 mm deep and 1500 mm long grooves were cut into the outer surface of the column [19]. The grooves were injected with epoxy adhe- sive to provide the necessary bond with the surrounding con- crete. The strips were carefully placed into the grooves to ensure that they were completely covered with the epoxy. The second conﬁguration represented two layers of CFRP fab- ric sheets having 1500 mm in length which were bonded to the outer column surface. In order to obtain the same area of the former conﬁguration, the sheets were extended 15 mm in the column sides. The third conﬁguration represented the exter- nally bonded CFRP plate of cross-sectional dimensions of 12 · 50 mm and extended 1500 mm in the column direction. Four 100 mm U-shaped anchorage strips were used to hold in position the CFRP plate as shown in Fig. 2. Material properties The used concrete was normal strength concrete of 25 MPa target strength, which was the average of three standard cubes of 150 mm side. The concrete mix contained a blend of type I and type II crushed pink limestone as the coarse aggregate whose maximum aggregate size was 16 mm. The sand was sup- plied from a local plant around the site and its ﬁneness modu- lus was 2.8%. The volumes of limestone and sand in one cubic meter were 0.82 m3 and 0.41 m3, respectively. The used cement is normal Portland cement (Type I) with 3 kN/m3 as cement content and the water–cement ratio was 0.42. The longitudinal reinforcement for both beam and columns was deformed bars of 400 MPa yield strength while the stirrups were ordinary mild steel of 240 MPa yield strength. The modulus of elasticity for both types of reinforcements was 200 kN/mm2. As for the strengthening materials, Table 1 shows the mechanical proper- Step II Insertion of the steel dowels for the upper column Step III Preparing the surface of old concrete and casting the upper column Step I Casting the lower column and the extruded beam monolithically Fig. 4 Execution steps for the specimens of the group #3. Strengthening of defected beam–column joints using CFRP 71

[PAGE 6] ties for both CFRP strips and fabric sheets along with the epoxy resins as provided by the manufacturer. Test setup and test procedure One bay of three-dimensional steel frame of Concrete and Heavy Structures Laboratory, Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University, was equipped and used to carry out testing as shown in Fig. 5. The specimens were considered hinged at both column ends. Steel caps were used at both ends of the column to distribute the column compression load at the upper end and to support the column lower end at the testing frame. In addition, a threaded rod was wrapped around the upper steel cap and fastened to the column of the testing frame to prevent any tilting of the specimen during testing. 100 mm LVDT was used in order to measure the vertical displacement at the tip of the beam. 10 mm strain gauges were used to measure the developed strains on reinforcement at the tension sides for beam, columns, stirrups and FRP. A com- pression load equals to 200 kN, simulating the load in a real structure, was ﬁrst applied to the column before the beam was loaded. Such column load was kept constant during the loading phase. Therefore, in several steps the beam was loaded up to failure. The loads on both column and beam were mea- sured by a load cell of 600 kN capacity. Before fastening the specimen to the testing frame, a laser level was used to insure the verticality of the column and to ensure the coincidence of the axes of the specimen, the load cell on the upper column and the load cell on the beam. After each loading step, the vertical beam tip deﬂection and the strains in the tension sides of the beam and the columns, the stirrup and the FRP were recorded. The loading rate for all specimens ranged from 5 to 10 kN/min. An automatic data logger unit (TDS-102) had been used in order to record and store data during the test for load cells, steel strain gauges, developed tensile strain on FRP, and LVDT. Results and discussion Table 2 summarizes the recorded failure characteristics after complete collapse of all specimens. In the following clauses, the criteria most related to the failure modes for the reference defected specimens and the CFRP-strengthened specimens are discussed in detail. The considered criteria include the mode of failure, load–deﬂection relationship, ultimate capacity, ductil- ity and initial stiffness, along with the ultimate developed strains on the main reinforcing bars at the joint, ultimate strain on joint stirrup and ultimate strain on either CFRP sheets or plates. Mode of failure Cracks began to appear at the tension side of the beam at a vertical load of about 10 kN for the base control specimen in addition to all reference specimens for the three groups. For the base control specimen, J0, increasing the vertical load led to increasing the propagation of cracks on the beam tension side up to a vertical load of about 25 kN. Then, cracks began to appear at the tension side of the lower column at a vertical load of about 45 kN where diagonal shear cracks began to ap- pear inside the beam–column joint. Increasing the load further increased the size of cracks further till the failure occurred due to the ﬂexural mode at the interface of the beam to the column at about 80 kN. As for the ﬁrst group, group #1, that represented the defect of the absence of stirrups at the beam–column joint, the refer- ence specimen, JI0, showed approximately the same behavior of the base control specimen, J0, except that the diagonal shear cracks began to appear at a vertical load of about 40 kN which is lower than that of the base control specimen. This can be attributed to the absence of transverse reinforcement. The diagonal shear failure was controlled the failure of such spec- imen at about 67 kN vertical load which is lower than the fail- ure load of the base control specimen. Strengthening the joint using CFRP sheets yielded the increased ultimate capacities of Table 1 Mechanical properties of CFRP material. Criteria CFRP strips CFRP fabric Epoxy (for strips) Epoxy (for fabric) Tensile strength (MPa) 2800 3500 30 30 Modulus of elasticity (GPa) 165 230 12.80 21.40 Failure strain (%) 1.70 1.50 1.0 4.80 Shear strength (MPa) – – 30.0 15.0 Thickness (mm) 1.2 0.13 – – Fig. 5 Test setup. 72 M.H. Mahmoud et al.