[PAGE 1] Optics & Laser Technology 169 (2024) 110077 Available online 16 September 2023 0030-3992/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Full length article Study of the TBC delamination in nanosecond laser percussion drilling of inclined film cooling holes Jian Niu a, Jian Yang a,*, Jiqing Tan a, Ziyao Qin a, Long Chen a, Tianqing Jia a, Hongxing Xu a,b,* a State Key Laboratory of Precision Spectroscopy, School of Physics and Electronic Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China b The Institute of Advanced Studies, School of Physics and Technology, Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, and Key Laboratory of Artificial Micro- and Nano- structures of Ministry of Education, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China A B S T R A C T To protect superalloys under extremely high temperatures in aero-engine core components, thermal barrier coatings (TBC) are sprayed on the material surface and thousands of film cooling holes are drilled which produce a cooling air film. A large proportion of these holes must be drilled at inclined angles relative to the surface in order to provide optimal cooling effects. Laser drilling has been widely applied in the industrial fabrication of film cooling holes due to its high precision, high efficiency, flexibility in drilling angle, and ability to drill all kinds of materials. In particular, nanosecond lasers have attracted lots of interest because they can achieve a good balance between drilling quality and efficiency. However, TBC is prone to delaminate during laser drilling, which severely reduces the lifetime of aero-engine components. In this study, we investigate TBC delamination in nanosecond laser percussion drilling of inclined film cooling holes in TBC-coated cobalt- based superalloy. It was found that the leading edges of the inclined holes suffer from more severe TBC delamination than the trailing edges. By studying the effects of laser focus position, pulse width, pulse energy, repetition rate and average power, we found that faster hole breakthrough and less heat accumulation were essential for the reduction of TBC delamination. Through multi-physical numerical simulations, it was demonstrated that the asymmetric heat transfer effect in laser inclined drilling causes much larger interfacial thermal stress on the leading edge than the trailing edge, qualitatively explaining our experimental observations. The results of this study contribute to the understanding of TBC delamination in laser drilling of inclined film cooling holes. 1. Introduction Rapid development of the aerospace industry requires continuous efforts in the improvement of aero engine efficiency and thrust which are largely decided by the working temperature. In advanced aero en­ gines, the temperature of gases flowing into the turbines has already reached over 1850 K with pressure over 50 atm [1]. The use of super­ alloys alone can no longer guarantee the operation of core components like combustion chamber liners and turbine blades in extremely high- temperature environments. On the one hand, thermal barrier coatings (TBC) are prepared on the superalloy surface which consists of a porous ceramic layer (yttrium stabilized zirconium, YSZ) and an oxidation- resistant metallic bond coating (BC) [2]. YSZ has very low thermal conductivity and effectively reduces the temperature experienced by the underlying material. On the other hand, thousands of film cooling holes introduce cold air onto the material surface and produce an air film that separates the material from high-temperature gases. The combinatory application of TBC and film cooling techniques enable aero engine working temperatures beyond the tolerance limit of superalloys [3]. Therefore, drilling of film cooling holes into TBC-coated superalloy is a crucial task in aero engine manufacturing. The insulating TBC layer poses a great challenge for traditional processing methods like electrical discharge machining (EDM) and electrochemical machining (ECM) [4–7]. With the development of laser technology, laser drilling has become a mature technology widely used in manufacturing due to its high precision, high efficiency, flexibility in drilling angle, and ability to drill all kinds of materials. In particular, laser drilling has been adopted by the aerospace industry to drill film cooling holes in aero-engine components [8], and a lot of researchers have studied laser drilling of aerospace materials [9–11]. Nevertheless, the thermal nature of material removal in laser drilling could induce unwanted effects that deteriorate drilling quality. In typical laser drilling of film cooling holes, the material temperature at the drilling front easily reaches the boiling temperature (greater than 3000 K) with interfacial thermal stress as high as 108-109 Pa [12,13]. The adhesion of the TBC layer to the substrate may not be strong enough to withstand the violent heat accumulation, thermal stress, and melt ejection during laser dril­ ling, resulting in cracks and delamination at the TBC/BC interface which reduces the lifetime of aero-engine components. Most of the studies on TBC delamination in laser drilling focus on * Corresponding authors at: State Key Laboratory of Precision Spectroscopy, School of Physics and Electronic Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China (H. Xu). E-mail addresses: jyang@lps.ecnu.edu.cn (J. Yang), hxxu@whu.edu.cn (H. Xu). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics and Laser Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optlastec https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2023.110077 Received 7 June 2023; Received in revised form 11 August 2023; Accepted 12 September 2023

[PAGE 2] Optics and Laser Technology 169 (2024) 110077 2 vertical film cooling holes [14]. Wang et al. [12] applied quasi- continuous-wave (QCW) laser to drill cooling holes through TBC- coated superalloy. The authors showed that the TBC delamination was induced by thermal stress during laser drilling and studied the influence of several drilling parameters. Later the authors [15] came up with a two-step approach in which the second step eliminates the interfacial cracks generated in the first step. Zheng et al. [13] established a coupled thermal–mechanical model by numerical simulation to quantify the ef­ fects of thermal stress and phase transformation stress on TBC delami­ nation in the case of picosecond laser drilling. Das and Pollock [16] used a femtosecond laser for trepan drilling of 300 µm and 600 µm holes in 1.5 mm TBC-coated superalloy CMSX4, eliminating surface defects such as spattering and delamination of the ceramic coatings. However, it takes 45 min to drill a single hole into a 1.5-mm-thick superalloy. Feng et al. [17] also demonstrated the usage of the femtosecond laser to drill delamination-free film cooling holes. However, in real aero engines, most of the film cooling holes are designed to be inclined relative to the material surface to optimize the cooling effectiveness [18]. The heat transfer and TBC delamination in laser drilling of inclined holes can be different and more complex because of the asymmetric leading and trailing edges. Inclined drilling of TBC-coated superalloys was studied by Sezer et al. [19–22] using QCW lasers. The dependence of TBC delamination length on laser parameters was studied and the delamination mecha­ nism regarding melt ejection was discussed. Kamalu et al. [23] also investigated the TBC delamination as functions of different parameters in QCW laser drilling of inclined film cooling holes. Girardot et al. [24] studied QCW laser inclined drilling of TBC-coated cobalt-based super­ alloy and found that TBC delamination was majorly caused by the me­ chanical stress induced by melt ejection. Marimuthu et al. [25] proposed a two-step drilling technique to remove the TBC layer before through- hole drilling to reduce TBC delamination. Similarly, Fan et al. [26] proposed a three-step approach to prevent TBC delamination. Mar­ imuthu and Smith [27] investigated the water-jet guided (WJG) laser drilling and compared it with QCW laser drilling. The experimental re­ sults as well as the finite element model demonstrate the superiority of WJG in avoiding TBC delamination. However, the instability of WJG systems such as water beam scattering and bubbles can seriously affect the drilling quality. Parthiban et al. [28] attempted to drill inclined micro-holes in TBC-coated superalloy using a picosecond laser. Never­ theless, very few literature studies the asymmetric heat transfer and thermal stress distribution in laser inclined drilling of film cooling holes. Among past literatures, two different physical mechanisms of TBC delamination have been proposed by researchers. In one type of study, it is suggested that heat accumulation during laser drilling generates large thermal stress at the TBC/BC interface due to the huge mismatch of thermal expansion coefficient and Young’s modulus between ceramics and metals, which eventually leads to TBC delamination [12,13,20,29,30]. Another type of study shows that the mechanical stress induced by the collision between melt droplets ejected and the leading-edge protrusion in laser inclined drilling caused the TBC delamination [19,21,24,26]. Some studies demonstrate the coexistence of these two mechanisms for delamination [22,23]. In different laser drilling systems, the contribution of thermal stress and melt ejection to TBC delamination varies. Laser pulse width is a critical parameter that decides the mechanisms of laser-matter interaction and TBC delamination. Traditional laser drilling involves high-power continuous-wave or QCW lasers. The ma­ terial removal mechanism for these lasers is purely thermal: material melts under laser heating and ejects with the help of recoil pressure and external auxiliary gas. Although with high efficiency, the thermal nature results in poor drilling quality in terms of large heat-affected zones (HAZ) and thick recast layers. On the contrary, ultrafast lasers have pulse widths on the order of picoseconds and femtoseconds which are similar to or even shorter than the carrier-lattice heat exchange time­ scale. The material almost directly changes from the solid state into the gaseous state, significantly reducing the HAZ and recast layers. Never­ theless, the average power of available ultrafast lasers is still limited, which cannot satisfy industrial requirements for drilling efficiency. A compromising solution is nanosecond laser drilling which achieves a good balance between quality and efficiency [31]. Current nanosecond laser systems can easily output average power over 1000 W while pre­ serving high drilling quality. However, a systematic study of the TBC delamination in nanosecond laser drilling is missing, hampering the application of nanosecond lasers in the drilling of film cooling holes. In this paper, the TBC delamination in nanosecond laser percussion drilling of inclined film cooling holes was studied comprehensively. It was found that TBC at the leading edges of the inclined holes were more prone to delaminate than that at the trailing edges. The effects of laser parameters on TBC delamination were investigated by controlled ex­ periments, revealing the key effects of hole breakthrough time and heat accumulation. Then, a multi-physical numerical model was built to simulate laser drilling of inclined holes through the multi-layer material. The asymmetric heat transfer effect in laser inclined drilling causes a large thermal stress difference at the TBC/BC interface between the leading and trailing edges, in agreement with our experimental observations. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Materials In this study, the samples used are multilayer materials, as shown in Fig. 1. The substrate material is 1.6-mm-thick cobalt-based superalloy Haynes 188 (HA188), a common material used for combustion chamber liners and turbine blades in aero engines. The BC is NiCrAlY alloy with a thickness of 130 µm to enhance TBC adhesion and prevent oxidation of the substrate. The TBC is 7 wt% Y2O3-ZrO2 (7YSZ) with a thickness of 270 µm prepared by the atmospheric plasma spraying (APS) method. 2.2. Experimental design Fig. 2 shows the schematic diagram of the nanosecond laser drilling system. The laser used in the experiment is an IPG nanosecond fiber laser (IPG, YLPN-300-Nanosecond) with a wavelength of 1064 nm, pulse width adjustable in 20–500 ns, maximum single pulse energy of 2 mJ, repetition rate adjustable in 2–4000 kHz, maximum average power of 300 W and a beam quality M2 of 1.5. Compared with the traditional Nd: YAG solid-state laser, our fiber laser has a higher maximum average power. The laser pulses pass through a collimator lens, get reflected by a dichroic mirror, and focus onto the sample by a focusing lens with a focal distance of 255 mm. Compressed air with a pressure of 6.5 bar is introduced into the processing head as auxiliary gas and a charge- coupled device (CCD) is implemented coaxially to monitor the laser Fig. 1. Metallographic image of the TBC-coated superalloy. J. Niu et al.

[PAGE 3] Optics and Laser Technology 169 (2024) 110077 3 spot and sample status in real-time. The 2.0-mm-thick TBC-coated su­ peralloy is mounted on a five-axis motion system. The nanosecond laser, CCD, and motion system can be monitored and controlled by a computer. Percussion drilling was used where the laser focus position was fixed at a certain position during laser drilling. The drilling time was set to be 8 s and the laser parameters used are shown in Table 1. The sample surface was angled at 45◦relative to the laser beam to drill inclined film cooling holes. To ensure the reliability and reproducibility of the laser drilling results, five holes were drilled and analyzed for each set of parameters. 2.3. Drilled-hole characterization After the drilling experiment, the holes were cleaned with acetone in an ultrasonic cleaner. To visualize the drilled-hole cross sections, the samples were first cut into small pieces at a distance of 2 mm from the edge of the hole. Then, they were covered with polyamide and me­ chanically ground and polished to expose the cross sections at the cen­ tral plane of the holes. After that, the samples were etched with 500 ml HCl + 35 ml H2SO4 + 150 ml CuSO4 as the metallographic solution for 20–40 s for better visual contrast between different layers. To measure the delamination length, the etched samples were observed in a mi­ croscope. The final observation plane is shown in Fig. 3. 3. Results and discussions 3.1. Effects of laser parameters In our experiments, we found that TBC delamination majorly took place at the TBC/BC interface at the leading edge of the inclined hole for all laser parameters, as shown in Fig. 3. Therefore, the delamination length at the TBC/BC interface at the leading edge was used as the metric for TBC delamination. Fig. 4 shows the effect of the laser focus position on the delamination length. Note that a value of zero for the laser focus position indicates focusing on the sample surface. Positive values mean that the focus position is above the surface, and vice versa for negative values. It can be seen that the delamination length gets larger when the laser focus position moves far away from the sample surface both upwards and downwards. Minimal delamination is ach­ ieved when the focus position is 1 mm below the sample surface. As shown in the inset of Fig. 4, since the holes are 45◦inclined, the actual drilling depth is approximately 2.8 mm. A tiny downward offset of the laser focus position helps keep the whole drilling depth within the laser focal range. This accelerates hole breakthrough and reduces heat accu­ mulation which is detrimental to TBC-metal adhesion. For the rest of this study, the laser focus position was fixed at this optimal position. The laser pulse energy, repetition rate, and average power are related through the following equation: Average power = pulse energy × repetition rate (1) Therefore, experiments had to be carried out where two of them changed simultaneously. As shown in Table 2, for our specific laser system, the accessible maximum laser pulse energy varies when we change the pulse width. Fig. 5 shows the delamination length for four different pulse widths with the pulse energy fixed at their respective accessible maximum values. Within each box of Fig. 5, the laser repetition rate and average power are changed together. For all pulse widths, the TBC delamination length increases monotonously with repetition rate or average power. One interesting observation is that the smallest delamination length takes place for 240 ns, 2 mJ, 50 kHz case where the average power is Fig. 2. Schematic of the experimental setup. Table 1 Laser parameter ranges Laser parameter Unit Range Wavelength nm 1064 Pulse width ns 60–500 Repetition rate kHz 50–2000 Pulse energy mJ 0.15–2 Average power W 30–300 J. Niu et al.

[PAGE 4] Optics and Laser Technology 169 (2024) 110077 4 100 W, while the delamination length is larger for lower average powers indicated by the yellow shaded regions where the holes are not even drilled through. This suggests that TBC delamination is not solely decided by the laser average power. We then fixed the repetition rate at 100 kHz and investigated the effects of pulse energy and average power on TBC delamination for different pulse widths. As shown in Fig. 6, interestingly, with the simultaneous increase of pulse energy and average power, the delami­ nation length first increases and then decreases for all pulse widths. We propose the following reason for this non-monotonous behavior. For too low pulse energies, little laser power is deposited and the drilled holes are shallow, which does not induce TBC delamination. As the pulse energy increases, more laser power is absorbed by the material and the holes get deeper. However, since the pulse energy is not large enough, the temperature is moderate and material removal is slow. Note that although all the laser energy is absorbed by the material, a lot of the laser energy is not used for material removal but simply dissipates away through heat transfer. Heat starts to accumulate at the TBC/BC interface, leading to an increase in interfacial thermal stress and TBC delamination length. Since the effective drilling depth of our inclined holes reaches 2.8 mm, a large pulse energy is essential for the removal of material at the bottom of the hole. Further increase in pulse energy accelerates hole breakthrough after which the laser beam simply passes through the hole without being absorbed by the material, thereby reducing heat accu­ mulation and TBC delamination. Of course, the material removal also slows down after the hole breakthrough. To validate our proposal, we performed another experiment where the laser average power was fixed at 300 W to study the delamination length as a function of pulse energy and repetition rate. As shown in Fig. 7, under the same average power, the combination of high pulse energy and low repetition rate is beneficial for the reduction of TBC delamination compared with the combination of low pulse energy and high repetition rate for all pulse widths studied. The metallographic images in Fig. 8 demonstrate the superiority of large pulse energy in reducing TBC delamination. In our experiments, a larger pulse energy results in faster hole breakthrough compared with a larger repetition rate case. Therefore, this behavior is consistent with our earlier proposal that faster hole breakthrough can reduce heat accumulation and thermal stress at the TBC/BC interface. Another observation from Fig. 7 is that the delamination length increases with pulse width when all other laser parameters are the same. However, this does not necessarily mean a pulse width of 60 ns is optimal for our laser system. As shown in Table 2, the accessible maximal pulse energy for 60 ns pulse width is only 0.74 mJ, severely limiting the drilling efficiency for deep holes. 3.2. Numerical simulation of thermal stress The contributions of thermal stress and melt ejection to TBC delamination are different for different laser drilling systems. In our study, thermal stress is identified as the main cause of TBC delamination for the following reasons: a) Melt ejection is usually violent for long-pulse laser drilling where the single pulse energy is large enough to eject large liquid droplets to hit the leading edge and induce significant mechanical stress. Here, we are using nanosecond laser with single pulse energy no more than 2 mJ, so the mechanical stress induced by melt ejection should be small. b) We observe a reduction of TBC delamination length when we in­ crease laser pulse energy (Figs. 6, 7), which cannot be explained by the melt-ejection-based mechanism and more consistent with a thermal-stress-based mechanism. Fig. 3. (a) Schematic diagram and (b) experimental image of the final observation plane. The red solid lines indicate the TBC delamination area. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Fig. 4. Effect of laser focus position on delamination length (pulse width = 240 ns; energy = 2 mJ; repetition rate = 100 kHz; average power = 200 W). Table 2 Laser pulse energy and repetition rate limits for different pulse widths. Pulse width (ns) Max pulse energy (mJ) Max repetition rate at max pulse energy (kHz) 60 0.74 405 120 1.33 225 240 2 150 500 2 150 J. Niu et al.

[PAGE 5] Optics and Laser Technology 169 (2024) 110077 5 c) We occasionally observe TBC delamination at the trailing edges, although to a smaller extent than the leading edges (Fig. 8(a)). In principle, the trailing edge should not suffer from mechanical stress induced by melt ejection due to the blunt-angle geometry. To understand the TBC delamination in laser drilling of inclined film cooling holes, a multi-physical numerical model was established with the commercial simulation software COMSOL Multiphysics based on the finite element method. Fig. 9(a) shows the flow chart of the theoretical model, including model setup, simulation of heat transfer, deformation geometry, solid mechanics, and analysis of the morphology of the drilled-holes as well as the temperature and thermal stress distributions. Since the interaction between nanosecond laser and material is extremely complicated and the focus of our study is the thermal stress generated at the TBC/BC interface, the following assumptions are made to simplify the model: (a) 2D assumption is made to reduce the computational resources needed. Although 3D models should in principle give more ac­ curate results, 2D models should be enough to capture the asymmetry between leading and trailing edges. (b) The model is based on a TBC/BC/substrate three-layer planar material system where the material properties at each layer are considered to be homogenous and isotropic. Thereinto, some of the properties of the BC and substrate are taken to be the same [12]. (c) The nanosecond laser source is simplified to an equivalent peri­ odic heat source according to the approach in [32]. (d) During the laser drilling process, a constant surface recession velocity is used based on the assumption that the ablation front is at a fixed temperature that is equal to the vaporization temper­ ature [12,13,33,34]. (e) Since we are majorly concerned with the interfacial thermal stress in the unablated solid region, the melt hydrodynamics Fig. 5. Effects of repetition rate and average power on TBC delamination length for different pulse widths. The yellow shaded regions indicate the holes were not drilled through, while the gray shaded regions indicate the holes were drilled through. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Fig. 6. Effects of pulse energy and average power on TBC delamination length for different pulse widths (repetition rate = 100 kHz). The yellow shaded re­ gions indicate the holes were not drilled through, while the gray shaded region indicates the holes were drilled through. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Fig. 7. Effects of repetition rate and pulse energy on TBC delamination length for different pulse widths (average power = 300 W). All holes were dril­ led through. J. Niu et al.

[PAGE 6] Optics and Laser Technology 169 (2024) 110077 6 during the drilling process [35] is ignored. The absorption of the laser by vapor and plasma is also ignored. (f) The elastic model is used to calculate the thermal stress, ignoring the plastic effect. Heat transfer inside the material is described by the classical heat conduction theory [36]: ρCp∂T ∂t = ∇.(k.T) (2) where T is temperature, t is time, and ρ, Cp, and k indicate the density, specific heat capacity, and thermal conductivity of the material, respectively. Laser heat source, surface convection, and thermal radia­ tion were implemented as boundary conditions for the heat transfer equations. The relationship between stress and strain is given by the following equations: εx = 1 E [σx −vσy ] + α(T)T (3) εy = 1 E [σy −vσx ] + α(T)T (4) where εx, εy represent the strains and σx, σy represent the stresses in two dimensions, respectively. v is the Poisson’s ratio, E is Young’s modulus and α(T) is the thermal expansion coefficient. The Von Mises stress is used as the metric for TBC delamination: σe =̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ σ2 x + σ2 y −σxσy √ (5) All the boundary conditions and mesh settings used in the simulation model are shown in Fig. 9(b). Fig. 10(a) shows the temperature distribution and heat transfer di­ rection on two edges of the hole under vertical drilling. The material near the edge of the hole is first heated by the laser, and then the heat is transferred to the surrounding area. As indicated by the blue dashed arrows, the heat transfer directions are symmetric between the two edges of the hole due to the symmetric geometry. In contrast, Fig. 10(b) shows the inclined drilling case. Due to the asymmetric geometry, the heat transfer directions at the leading and trailing edges of the inclined hole are clearly different. At the leading edge, the direction of heat transfer is upwards and towards the TBC/BC interface into a confined triangular zone where heat cannot easily escape. Moreover, TBC has a very low thermal conductivity, causing large heat accumulation at the leading edge. On the contrary, at the trailing edge, the direction of heat transfer is downwards and away from the TBC/BC interface into the substrate. The substrate has a much higher thermal conductivity than TBC and the heat generated by laser drilling is quickly dissipated, thereby reducing the heat accumulation at the trailing-edge TBC/BC interface. The asymmetric heat transfer at two edges eventually leads to different thermal stress levels. Fig. 11 shows the distribution of thermal stress at different drilling depths. It can be seen that the thermal stress changes abruptly at the TBC/BC interface due to the huge mismatch of Fig. 8. The cross sections of laser-drilled holes for (a) low pulse energy and high repetition rate, (b) high pulse energy and low repetition rate. Fig. 9. (a) Flow chart and (b) boundary conditions and mesh settings of the theoretical model. J. Niu et al.