[PAGE 1] Composite Interfaces ISSN: 0927-6440 (Print) 1568-5543 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tcoi20 The eﬀect of laser-texturing conﬁgurations on the interfacial resistance of carbon reinforced aluminium laminate Ala Abedinzadeh Andarabi, Karim Shelesh-Nezhad & Tajbakhsh Navid Chakherlou To cite this article: Ala Abedinzadeh Andarabi, Karim Shelesh-Nezhad & Tajbakhsh Navid Chakherlou (2023) The eﬀect of laser-texturing conﬁgurations on the interfacial resistance of carbon reinforced aluminium laminate, Composite Interfaces, 30:1, 103-122, DOI: 10.1080/09276440.2022.2120731 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09276440.2022.2120731 Published online: 07 Sep 2022. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 281 View related articles View Crossmark data Citing articles: 8 View citing articles Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tcoi20

[PAGE 2] The effect of laser-texturing configurations on the interfacial resistance of carbon reinforced aluminium laminate Ala Abedinzadeh Andarabi, Karim Shelesh-Nezhad and Tajbakhsh Navid Chakherlou Division of Plastics and Composites Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran ABSTRACT Laser ablation can be incorporated for surface treatment of carbon- reinforced aluminium laminate (CARALL) with environmental ben­ efit as compared to chemical treatments. In the present research, laser surface structuring with different patterns was implemented on the aluminium substrates. The effect of laser-texturing pattern on the performance of CFRP/Al (carbon fiber reinforced polymer/ aluminium) interface was investigated by undertaking lap shear, modes I and II interlaminar fracture tests. The laser surface structur­ ing developed micro topography on the metal adherent and enhanced the interfacial area, mechanical interlocks, fiber bridging and cohesive failure in the CFRP/Al interface. The X-pattern with six successive passes of laser ablation offered the highest laser surface coverage (85.6%), leading to the improvement of lap shear strength, mode I and II critical interlaminar fracture toughness as high as 40, 110 and 52%, respectively, as compared to the chemical treated samples. ARTICLE HISTORY Received 8 May 2022 Accepted 29 July 2022 KEYWORDS Carbon reinforced aluminium laminate; surface treatment; laser-texturing; interlaminar fracture toughness 1. Introduction Fiber metal laminates (FMLs) are hybrid composite structures based on thin metallic sheets and layers of fiber-reinforced plastics [1]. The fiber metal laminates (FMLs) have many advantages over single monolithic materials, including superior strength, stiff­ ness, fatigue performance, impact and flame resistance and damage tolerance [2]. In modern aircrafts, FMLs have been used in pressurized fuselage cabin and wing skin due to their high resistance to fatigue [3]. Using FMLs can overcome the disadvantages of both aluminium alloys and fiber reinforced composites, including poor fatigue and impact performances [4,5]. According to Zhong et al [5], the surface modification of metal substrates before laminating was the most important step in the FML production and directly affected the FML performances. For bonded CFRP joints, the perfor­ mances of single lap shear joints depended on several factors such as the joint geometry, the types of substrate material and adhesive, the environmental and opera­ tive conditions, and in particular, the surface treatment of the substrates [6–8]. In the metal joints bonded with adhesives, the surface modifications can not only eliminate CONTACT Karim Shelesh-Nezhad shelesh-nezhad@tabrizu.ac.ir COMPOSITE INTERFACES 2023, VOL. 30, NO. 1, 103–122 https://doi.org/10.1080/09276440.2022.2120731 © 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

[PAGE 3] the adverse contaminations and oxide-layer of metal substrates, but they can also enhance the joint interfacial area by increasing the surface roughness [9,10]. When the substrate surface is entirely wetted by adhesive, a rougher and larger interface will enhance the physical and chemical interactions between the substrate and adhesive [11]. The use of mechanical surface modification methods such as sanding eliminates the outer surface oxide layer of metallic substrates, creates macro roughness and increases the effective surface area [12,13]. Chemical methods, on the other hand, have limitations and problems in terms of safety and health. Moreover, the residues of chemical treatments can affect interlaminar bond strength. The use of an electro- physical method such as laser processing has the advantages of high speed and high degree of control on process parameters [14]. According to Pan et al [15], the laser ablation produced an oxide layer on magnesium substrate surface, providing an excellent protection against the galvanic corrosion in CFRP/Mg laminates. According to Pariona et al [16], the creation of a finely porous oxide protective layer during the rapid remelting process contributed to the elevation of H2SO4 chemical corrosion resistance of laser-treated Al alloy. Zhu et al [17] studied the effect of laser-spotting on the lap shear strength of Al-Al adhesively bonded joints after water soak. The laser-ablated surface had a barrier effect against water penetration in the interface of bonded joint and promoted the cohesive failure and lap shear strength. Andarabi et al [18] assessed the effect of laser-texturing on the bond performances of aluminium/epoxy/aluminium joints by performing lap shear, modes I and II interlaminar fracture tests. The laser surface structuring developed micro- nano topography on the metal adherent and enhanced the interfacial area and cohesive failure in the interface of joint, and substantially promoted the bond performances. Sorrentino et al [19] bonded the laser surface modified CFRP laminates by using epoxy adhesive. A point-texture laser surface modification with the dimples of 200 µm in diameter and 10 µm depth was performed. The critical fracture energy in ENF samples improved by about 80%, as comparted to the virgin sample. Xie et al [20] incorporated a two-step laser surface treatment on CFRP laminates using an Nd:YAG pulsed laser to improve the shear strength of CFRP laminates bonded joints. At the first step, the resin at the outer surface of laminates was completely removed by an optimal laser etching process to provide neat carbon fiber fabric. At the second step, the carbon fabric was further irradiated to produce a series of mini-grooves on its surface. The effect of laser scan parameters comprising grooves distance and scan angle was analysed. Experimental results indicated that crossed grooves significantly enhanced the shear strength of the CFRP-laminates bonded joints. The apparent shear strength of single lap bonded joints of CFRP-laminates increased by 40.8% compared to the non-surface modification state. Laban et al [21] studied the influence of laser surface treatment on the mode I interlaminar fracture toughness (GIC) of aluminium/glass fiber FML. To promote micromechanical interlocks (MMI), point-texture laser treatment performed on the Al substrates. The laser treated samples displayed 132.7% increase in GIC as compared to pristine sample that only undergone degreasing. The laser treated zones on the Al substrate acted as localized barriers resisting the crack propagation and altered the failure mode from adhesive to adhesive-cohesive. Akman et al [22] studied the effect of number of consecutive laser treatment scans (1 to 9) on Al surface on the shear strength of Al/ CFRP adhesive joints. By increasing the number of laser scans (up to 5 successive scans), 104 A. ABEDINZADEH ANDARABI ET AL.

[PAGE 4] the shear strength increased. The higher number of laser scans (6 to 9) deteriorated the surface texture quality, and reduced the effective surface treated area. The effect of laser-induced surface structuring of aluminium substrate on the delami­ nation resistance of carbon reinforced aluminium laminate (CARALL) has been barely explored. In this research, by implementing an array of experiments design, the optimum laser-texturing pattern and the number of laser passes for achieving the maximum shear strength and interlaminar fracture toughness in carbon reinforced aluminium laminate were discovered. In particular, for the first time, the mode I and mode II interlaminar fracture toughness of carbon reinforced aluminium laminate undergone different laser- texturing treatments were investigated. The micro-topographies of laser surface treat­ ments and their corresponding effects on the interlaminar resistance were explored. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Materials Aluminium alloy sheet, aircraft industry grade (7075-T6, AMAG Austria), of 1.8 mm thickness was employed as metal substrate. 12K-T300 unidirectional carbon fabric (TASUNS, China) was utilized as the reinforcement. The epoxy resin (KER 828) along with triethyltetramine hardener (Kumho P&B Chemicals) with a resin to hardener weight ratio of 100:12 were used as the resin system. The sodium hydroxide (NaOH), hydrochloric acid (HCl) and nitric acid (HNO3) were supplied from Merck, Germany. 2.2 Laser- surface structuring of Al substrates An ND-YAG laser beam marking machine (SW-FLM100P, China) with laser wavelength of 1064 nm, pulse frequency of 20 kHz, spot diameter of 200 µm and nominal maximum power of 100 W was employed. The setting parameters were adjusted as shown in Table 1. A trial-and-error approach was incorporated to obtain the setting parameters for laser processing, comprising speed, pulse duration and power, in order to yield the maximum possible roughness and laser surface coverage on the Al substrate. The amount of pulse energy as a dependent parameter was calculated. Before the laser structuring of aluminium substrates, the sheets were washed in acetone solution in order to remove the greasy residues and contaminations. The laser treatment on aluminium substrates was accomplished in five different patterns, encom­ passing linear grooves of 0°, 45°, 90° and ±45° (×-texture) with grooves distance of 0.5 mm, and point-texture with grid dimension of 0.5 mm (Figure 1b). In order to examine the effect of laser passes on roughness and bond strength, different number of laser passes (1, 3, 6 and 10) were applied. Table 1. Laser ablation setting parameters. average power (W) processing speed (mm/s) pulse duration (µs) pulse energy (mJ) 80 400 10 200 COMPOSITE INTERFACES 105

[PAGE 5] 2.3. Chemical treatment of Al substrates In order to compare the results of laser treatment with a state of art treatment, a three-stage chemical treatment following a mechanical abrasion pre-treatment as reported by Shokrian et al [9] was employed. At first, in order to eliminate the clad layer of Al sheet, the Al substrate surface was abraded using sandpaper (180 grit) in the circular paths and acetone rinsed. Al substrate was then degreased by immersing it in 1 M solution of NaOH for 5 min at about 65°C. After the degreasing stage, the created oxide layer on the surface of Al was removed manually using a soft cloth. Following, HCl and nitric acid treatments were consecutively carried out by immersing Al substrate in 3 M solution of HCl acid for 25 min and in 1 M solution of nitric acid for 40 min at ambient condition. Figure 1. (a) the construction and dimensions of the lap shear sample (dimensions in mm), (b) surface textures, (c and d) setup for lap shear specimen fabrication and (e) lap shear tensile testing. 106 A. ABEDINZADEH ANDARABI ET AL.

[PAGE 6] 2.4. Surface roughness analysis of Al substrates The roughness of laser treated Al substrate was characterized by utilizing a surface profilometer (PFM-3320, Iran) with the measurement resolution of 50 nm. For linear textures, the roughness was measured in transverse direction to laser passes. 2.5. Lap shear tensile test The standard test method of ASTM D5868–01 [23] for lap shear adhesion for fiber- reinforced plastic bonding was applied to obtain the CFRP/Al bond performance. The lap shear specimens were prepared in accordance with the ASTM D5868–01. The geometry and dimensional features of the lap shear sample are depicted in Figure 1(a). The apparent shear stress at failure was obtained by using Equation 1 [23]. τ ¼ Pmax bL (1) Where Pmax represents the maximum applied shear load; L and b denote overlap length and width of specimen, respectively. To fabricate the lap shear samples, substrates of 113 × 26 mm2 dimensions were cut from the supplied aluminium sheet. All edges of substrates were polished to the finished sizes by applying fine sandpaper. After undertaking the laser-surface treatment on the Al substrates, as described in the section 2.2, the epoxy resin system was prepared. The resin and hardener (with the weight ratio of 100:12) were gently mixed for 3 minutes and then degassed for 3 minutes in a vacuum chamber at −0.85 bar. The laser treated area was larger than the substrates overlap area to avoid the initiation of failure from an untreated spot. Figure 1(a,c and d) demonstrates the lap shear sample fabrication setup. Six layers of unidirectional carbon fabric, saturated with epoxy resin (with the weight ratio of fiber to resin 60:40), were laid up on the Al substrate. Al tabs were adhered to the ends of the lap shear sample using epoxy adhesive to prevent bending component during the tensile loading. The specimen positioned in a pin-locating fixture setup to ensure that the sample was aligned and restrained securely as illustrated in Figure 1(c,d). Next, the samples were allowed to cure at ambient temperature for 24 h, followed by post curing at 45°C for 8 hours. The residues of resin on the edges of specimens were removed by using fine sandpaper. The lap shear samples loaded in tension at a displacement rate of 13 mm/min in a universal testing machine (Zwick Z100). At least three replications were performed and the average value along with ±standard deviation were reported. Figure 1 (e) shows the setup implemented for the lap shear tensile testing. The images of fractured surfaces of specimens were captured and analysed. The percentage of cohesive failure area was calculated by using Image-J software (ImageJ 1.52 v). 2.6. Mode I interlaminar fracture test ASTM D5528 [24] recommends the application of double cantilever beam (DCB) test to measure the mode I interlaminar fracture toughness, GIC, of composite laminates. Figure 2 presents the layers arrangement and dimensions of fabricated DCB sample. According to the ASTM D 5528 [24], for the mode I interlaminar fracture toughness COMPOSITE INTERFACES 107