[PAGE 1] Full length article Through-glass-via formation by combining single-pulse CO laser irradiation and assisted removal of rapidly induced deep melts Sho Itoh a,*, Kohei Matsumoto b, Masataka Sato b, Souta Matsusaka b, Hirofumi Hidai b,c a Engineering Technology and Science, Higher Colleges of Technology, Baniyas North, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates b Department of Mechanical Engineering, Chiba University, 1-33 Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba 263-8522 Japan c Molecular Chirality Research Center, Chiba University, 1-33 Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba 263-8522 Japan A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Through glass via Microdrilling Glass Pulsed CO laser Assisting air Polymer sheet lamination A B S T R A C T Through-glass-via (TGV) formation has been a critical step in applying glass substrates to electronic devices. Although some methods that involve using lasers to drill glass substrates have been proposed, simpler, lower- cost, and faster approaches are necessary to meet the technical requirements for industrial implementation. In this article, a new approach is proposed in which a CO laser, which has deeper light penetration into glass than a CO2 laser, is used. A novel approach is used in which the ejection of the deep melts induced by the CO laser beam is facilitated by applying assisting air and polymer sheet lamination. A TGV was fabricated with an inlet diameter of approximately 150 μm and a depth of 700 μm with smooth hole inlet and outlet surfaces by using a single- pulse laser beam. The approach is easy to implement, making the application of glass substrates in electronic devices easier. 1. Introduction Glass substrates are high-potential materials for electronic devices owing to their excellent electrical insulation properties and the easiness of larger-size sheet manufacturing [1]. For electrical connections to be implemented through forming through-hole electrodes, microdrilling of the glass is fundamental; however, developing an implementable tech­ nique for creating such holes is challenging because of the brittleness of the material, thereby hindering their applications. To date, glass drilling has been performed using mechanical drilling [2], ultrasonic machining [3], abrasive jet machining [4], etching [5–7], electrical discharging [8], and laser processing [9]. If microdrilling is possible, the potential applications are not limited to semiconductors, such as interposers [10–13] and glass core substrates [14], but also include micro­ electromechanical system (MEMS) sensors [15] and radio-frequency devices [16]. Among these processes, laser drilling is advantageous for drilling holes on a micrometer order because it is a noncontact technique with high productivity. Various researchers have proposed drilling holes of various sizes. For example, ultraviolet (UV) lasers, including solid-state or excimer lasers with a mask projection method, have been used for drilling [17,18]. However, difficulty in increasing the pulse energy or durability of optics owing to a short wavelength results in a poor life of the optics, particularly when using a high-power laser, such as an excimer laser. Ultrashort-pulse lasers make more-precise material removal possible in the depth direction; however, the processing speed is low [19,20]. Hence, an additional step, such as chemical etching, has been proposed to assist in material removal [21,22]. Although reason­ able high-aspect-ratio vias were achieved, multiple steps are required. By contrast, for a higher process speed, longer-pulse-width laser beams utilizing the thermal process mechanism are also useful. Some authors have reported on using CO2 laser pulse techniques [23–25]. Ogura et al. compared drilled hole qualities depending on the different types of glass [23]. Brusberg et al. achieved through-hole drilling of 500-µm-thick glass within 0.25 s and proposed methods to reduce thermal stresses [24]. Katsura et al. formed 25-µm-diameter holes with using a pulsed CO2 laser with a wavelength of 9.3 µm [25]. For these processes, the material removal mechanism is based on the glass’s high absorption characteristics. Thus, the material should be gradually removed from the front surface toward the depth direction, resulting in challenges for drilling thicker glass substrates. Another approach using a transparent continuous wave (CW) laser beam was reported [26,27]. Additionally, Ito et al. proposed an innovative approach for drilling a hole using an ultrashort pulsed laser-induced filament, resulting in the selective * Corresponding author. E-mail address: sitoh@hct.ac.ae (S. Itoh). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics and Laser Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optlastec https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2026.115758 Received 10 June 2025; Received in revised form 16 May 2026; Accepted 17 June 2026 Optics & Laser Technology 203 (2026) 115758 Available online 24 June 2026 0030-3992/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

[PAGE 2] absorption of the fiber laser pulse [28]. Although 10-µm-diameter and 100-µm-depth holes were achieved, the approach requires two types of laser, which results in a more complicated optics configuration. Mat­ sumoto et al. reported on a quasi-CW laser approach using a picosecond laser pulse train [29]. Thus far, drilling substrates thicker than 100 µm has not been reported, probably owing to the typical challenge of achieving high-energy ultrashort laser pulses. Considering the state of the art, for the future implementation of laser drilling, the technology in demand should be (1) simpler, (2) less expensive, and (3) faster. How­ ever, the above-mentioned approaches cannot satisfy these criteria simultaneously, which is a technical gap. Recently, CO lasers have become commercially available, and po­ tential applications to material processing have been reported [30]. While a CO laser was developed and has evolved through oscillator research [31,32], real-world applications are scarce. The reported ap­ plications include photoacoustic spectroscopy [33], cutting and drilling of metals [34], cutting and drilling of glass and ceramics [30], and printed circuit board microvia drilling and plastic film sealing [35]. Regarding glass processing, light with a wavelength of approximately 5 µm transmits more into the glass than in a CO2 laser. However, to the authors’ best knowledge, no study has been conducted on glass deep drilling using a CO laser beam. One assumed challenge is that the ab­ sorption coefficient becomes too low to achieve material removal when melting glass. However, CO lasers still have potential, e.g., when the glass becomes thicker (200–700 µm), the glass is heated evenly in the depth direction in a short time. The heating and melting time of the glass to the bottom based on the heat conduction mechanism might be reduced, resulting in more-efficient pulse energy transmittance. De­ mand exists for drilling glass with a thickness of > 200 µm because thicker substrates are easier to use owing to the lower flexibility. In this study, the potential of CO laser application to glass micro­ drilling was investigated. First, the deep penetration of glass using a CO laser was characterized. In addition to laser irradiation, two methods were developed to assist the ejection of the molten volume induced by the CO laser: (1) air jetting to remove molten volume by means of the airflow and (2) polymer sheet lamination, with the expectation of an increase in laser absorption, resulting in enhanced material removal. Process mechanisms are discussed together with postdrilling and in situ observation results. Finally, the proposed technique was compared with other laser-drilling methods. 2. Materials and methods Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram of the experimental setup. A CO laser beam was emitted from an oscillator (Diamond J-3–5, Coherent Inc.) with a wavelength of 5.5 μm and maximum power of 250 W. The emitted laser beam was enlarged, delivered, and focused onto the glass sample using a lens with a focal length of 50 mm. The estimated focal spot diameter was approximately 100 μm, considering an M2 of approximately 1.2 and light absorption by moisture in the air. Most of the laser beam path was enclosed using lens tubes, which were purged using dried air to reduce the effect of moist air. Glass samples were placed on a set of one-dimensional mechanical stages that could move three-dimensionally. An assisting-air jet was passed through a nozzle with an inner diameter of 0.3 mm, set with an angle of θ = 45◦and standoff distance of 2 mm, to blow away the locally molten volume. In this study, considering future implementation using a Galvano scanning lens, the air jet nozzle was not configured coaxially to the laser beam, which is typically applied in laser processing. For comparison, the glass sample was also drilled using a CO2 laser beam emitted from an oscil­ lator (Evolution 100, Synrad Inc.). The transmittance of the glass was measured by removing the first mirror from the oscillator and comparing the power value with and without glass using a thermal sensor (FL250A-BB-50, Ophir Optronics Solutions Ltd.). Transmitted energy distributions inside the glass for CO2 and CO laser irradiation were estimated using the following approach. A Gaussian-profile beam was assumed; thereafter, the 1/e2 beam radius rw at each z location was calculated as rw(z) = rw0̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 1 + (λz/πrw02)2 √ (1) where rw0 is the 1/e2 beam radius at z = 0, and λ is the wavelength of the lasers. At each depth z, the energy intensity I along the r direction was calculated as I(r) = exp ( −2r2/ rw 2) (2) Regarding the beam attenuation, the Lambert–Beer law [36] was applied in the z-direction. I = I0exp( −αd) (3) where I0 is the initial intensity, α is the absorption coefficient, and d is the light transmitted distance. The calculated energy distribution was plotted if the energy at (r, z) = (r, 0) equaled 1. Alkali-free glass substrates with a thickness of 300–700 μm (Eagle- XG, Corning, Inc.) were primarily used for the drilling experiment, and those with thicknesses of 100 and 200 µm (Willow Glass, Corning, Inc.) were prepared to characterize the absorption properties. Through careful measurement, the thickness was found to be 330 μm for the 300- μm-thick glass. Similar type of alkali-free glass substrates (OA-10G, Nippon Electric Glass Co., Ltd.) with thicknesses of 30, 50, 100, and 300 µm were also prepared for precise calibration of absorption properties, where similar absorption properties were assumed. For polymer sheet lamination experiments, a PET-based surface protective polymer film (E- MASK RP301, Nitto Denko Corp.) with a thickness of 59 µm [37] was laminated on the front and/or back surfaces of the glass sample and delaminated after laser irradiation. After drilling, the holes were analyzed using an optical microscope (ECLIPSE ME600, Nikon Corp). After the sample was annealed to obtain the vertical sections without Fig. 1. Experimental setup: overview (top), two-dimensional views of laser irradiation plus assisting air (bottom left), and laser irradiation plus polymer sheet lamination (bottom right). S. Itoh et al. Optics and Laser Technology 203 (2026) 115758 2

[PAGE 3] breaking, the holes were exposed using sectioning via a glass scriber and observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JSM-IT200, JEOL Ltd.). The surface roughness of the hole wall was measured using a confocal microscope (LEXT OLS4000, Olympus Co., Ltd.). The drilling process was monitored using a high-speed camera (FASTCAM SA5, Photron, Ltd.) and metal halide lamp (LS-M250, SUMITA Optical Glass, Inc.) as a back light source. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Characterization of absorption property The transmittance was measured, whereas the light reflection on the surfaces was neglected. Fig. 2a shows the relation between the glass thickness and transmittance I/I0 for the CO2 and CO lasers. For the 330- µm-thick Eagle XG, the transmittances of the CO2 and CO laser light were 0.0063 and 0.034, respectively, and for the 100-µm-thick Willow, they were 0.015 and 0.26, respectively, showing a clear difference. Absorption coefficients (defined as α10.6 µm and α5.5 µm) were determined using approximate curves fitted by Eq. (3). The properties of the glasses used were assumed to be similar, and the transmittance values in the thickness range below 100 µm were complemented. Moreover, α10.6 µm and α5.5 µm were determined as approximately 1000 and 120 cm−1, respectively. In the same approach, the transmittance and absorption coefficient of the polymer sheet were determined as 0.37 and 170 cm−1, respectively. Based on the measured absorption coefficients, the energy Fig. 2. (a) Measured transmittance curves for CO2 and CO laser. Two similar types of glass were used as absorbent media. (b) Absorption distribution map imaged based on Lambert–Beer law and the measured absorption coefficients for the CO2 laser (left) and CO laser (right). S. Itoh et al. Optics and Laser Technology 203 (2026) 115758 3

[PAGE 4] absorption distribution and the propagated laser beam (shown in the red curve) were plotted for the 300-µm-thick glass, as shown Fig. 2b. The volume of the red part for the CO laser (λ = 5.5 µm) reached a deeper position compared with that for the CO2 laser (λ = 10.6 µm), and a further absorption difference was observed at the back surface. This result indicated that deep penetration is expected for CO laser irradia­ tion on glass. 3.2. Process parameters and effects of assisting air and polymer lamination Table 1 summarizes the drilling results, including images of hole surfaces and sectional profiles obtained by changing pulse energies and numbers. The results were compared in the four irradiation patterns: (a) laser beam illumination only, (b) laser plus air jetting, (c) laser plus polymer lamination (front and back surfaces), and (d) laser plus air Table 1 Drilling condition map using a CO laser with different pulse widths, energies, and pulse numbers. The pulse numbers at 150, 200, and 950 µs were 5, 3, and 2, respectively, as indicated above the images. Furthermore, the four patterns were compared to consider the effects of air jetting and polymer lamination. S. Itoh et al. Optics and Laser Technology 203 (2026) 115758 4

[PAGE 5] jetting plus polymer lamination. In Pattern (a), the material was removed only near the front and back surfaces. The inside of the glass was locally melted in the depth direction, and a crack was observed outside the molten volume, as depicted by the blue arrows in the Pattern (a) column. The inside of the glass included void formation. Thus, it was concluded that the material removal capability was low for only CO laser beam irradiation. By contrast, images of Pattern (b) showed more material removal capability for laser plus air jetting. However, a crack around the drilled hole still appeared. In Pattern (c), the material was also unexpectedly removed, and through-hole drilling was achieved even without air jetting. In the condition of the 200-µs pulse, single- pulse and small-diameter drilling was achieved. In this condition, a locally narrowed region (necking) appeared, as shown by red arrows. The crack also did not appear in this pattern. The material removal mechanism is discussed in Section 3.4. For Pattern (d), a slight improvement was observed in terms of crack formation for a pulse width of 150 μs and pulse number of 5 compared with Pattern (c). Fig. 3 shows micrographs of the hole profiles for 330-, 500-, and 700- μm-thick glass drilled using a single-pulse technique with pulse widths of 200, 350, and 450 μs, respectively. In all drilling conditions, the through glass via (TGV) was formed. The inlet diameters were 112, 125, and 159 μm, whereas the outlet diameters were 27, 64, and 68 μm, respectively. Particularly, straight holes were formed in the middle part range of the hole depth. Generally, the taper angle θt (taper ratio tanθt) can be described using the relation tanθt = (wi −wo)/2t, where wi and wo are the inlet and outlet diameters, respectively, and t is the glass thickness. Thus, taper ratios of 0.047, 0.025 and 0.022 at the 50 %, 56 %, and 57 % middle ranges of the depth (the ranges were shown as Fig. 3. Optical micrographs of front, back, and sectional views of the holes drilled in 330-, 500-, and 700-µm-thick glass via single pulse and pulse widths of 200, 350 and 450 µs, respectively. Fig. 4. Relation between pulse energy and drilled hole depth (circle: laser irradiation and double-surface polymer lamination, through hole; red triangle: laser irradiation and double-surface polymer lamination, blind hole; and △: laser irradiation only, blind hole). Fig. 5. Effects of the assisting air at different pressures. Pressure effects were compared in the conditions without air and 0.2 and 0.4 MPa. S. Itoh et al. Optics and Laser Technology 203 (2026) 115758 5

[PAGE 6] arrows), respectively were achieved. Additionally, the process speeds based on the depth were calculated to be at least 1.65, 1.67, and 1.75 m s−1, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4, the process window is summarized based on the relationship between the pulse energy and the drilled hole depth for three conditions: laser irradiation only (black triangle), laser irradiation with double-surface polymer lamination resulting in blind holes (red triangle), and laser irradiation with double-surface polymer lamination resulting in through holes (circle). In the case of only laser irradiation, the drilled hole depth increased gradually with pulse energy, while through-hole formation was not achieved within the investigated energy range. As shown in the broken curve, the data were fitted with a loga­ rithmic function, as typically used for laser fluence [36], considering the single pulse and neglecting the effect of molten glass flow. By contrast, in the case of double-surface polymer lamination, a marked increase in the drilled hole depth was observed, and through holes were formed at higher pulse energies. This increase in drilling depth suggests that the material removal mechanism is altered by the presence of the polymer layers, rather than being governed solely by direct laser absorption in the glass. A more detailed discussion of the underlying removal mech­ anisms is provided in Section 3.4. Fig. 5 shows the effect of assisting air on drilling behavior in the absence of polymer lamination. Three sets of laser irradiation condi­ tions, i.e., different pulse widths and pulse numbers, were compared. The influence of air pressure was examined under three conditions: without air, 0.2 MPa, and 0.4 MPa. In most cases, cracks were observed because molten glass tended to redeposit around the hole surface during laser irradiation, leading to residual thermal stress. For the condition of 200 µs and one pulse, material removal increased with increasing air pressure. A necking region appeared at 0.2 MPa, as indicated by white arrows. At 0.4 MPa, the diameter of this region increased, suggesting that air jetting can contribute to improvement of the hole profile. For 200 µs and three pulses, a through hole was formed without air jetting, whereas the holes drilled at 0.2 and 0.4 MPa were curved toward the right direction, which is probably influenced by the air-jetting angle. For the condition of 150 µs and two pulses, deep drilling was achieved only Fig. 6. Micrographs of the front, back, and sectional views of the holes drilled (a) without lamination and (b) front-surface, (c) back-surface, and (d) double-surface polymer sheet lamination. S. Itoh et al. Optics and Laser Technology 203 (2026) 115758 6