[PAGE 1] Optics and Lasers in Engineering 121 (2019) 406–415 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics and Lasers in Engineering journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optlaseng Two-step approach to improving the quality of laser micro-hole drilling on thermal barrier coated nickel base alloys Rujia Wang a , b , c , Xia Dong a , b , c , Kedian Wang a , b , c , ∗ , Xiaomao Sun a , b , c , Zhengjie Fan a , b , c , Wenqiang Duan a , b , c a State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing System Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710054, China b Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robots, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China c School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China a r t i c l e i n f o Keywords: Laser drilling Thermal barrier coating (TBC) Delamination Recast layer Temporal pulse train modulation Femtosecond laser a b s t r a c t To improve the quality and processing eﬃciency of laser micro-hole drilling on thermal barrier coated nickel base alloys, a two-step approach is proposed. Through-holes were initially fabricated by a millisecond laser and were subsequently reﬁned by a femtosecond laser. In step one, the inﬂuence of diﬀerent pulse shapes on hole characteristics, such as taper and delamination was investigated using a temporal pulse train modulation (TPTM). In step two, femtosecond laser trepanning with an axial feed method was used to remove the recast layer. The results showed that a ramp-down pulse shape with a short time interval could prevent the vapor pressure from suddenly dropping, which was conducive to the continuous upward ﬂow of the melt. This pulse shape led to holes with a small taper. The delamination location was independent of pulse shape, and with the increase of maximum peak power in the pulse train, it would shift from the bond coat (BC)/substrate interface to the thermal barrier coating (TBC)/BC interface. The preset trepanning radius can be precisely determined based on the measurements of the prefabricated hole diameter and the thickness of the recast layer. Finally, the recast layer and delamination cracks could be completely eliminated by femtosecond laser trepanning. In total, about 0.4 s were spent for the prefabrication of a hole and 5 min for the reﬁnement, which could be further reduced with higher power levels and higher trepanning speeds. The validity of this two-step approach was veriﬁed by experimental results, and ﬁnally, drilled holes of high quality were obtained. 1. Introduction Considering the extremely high temperatures and high availability requirements of aero and gas turbines and their components, thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) [1] and ﬁlm-cooling holes have been widely used for thermal insulation of critical components, such as combustion chambers, nozzle guide vanes, and turbine blades. TBCs can eﬀectively limit the increase of temperature in the substrate due to their relatively low thermal conductivity. Film cooling holes can produce a thin cooling ﬁlm close to the blade surface with the help of internal channels of the components. Therefore, even under extreme conditions the blades could still maintain a relatively low temperature. Traditional methods includ- ing electrochemical and electro-discharge machining are not eﬀective for hole-opening on coated alloys [2] . Currently, laser technology has shown its great potential for fabricating micro-holes and periodic struc- tures [3,4] . As for hole-opening, laser drilling is feasible due to its ability to machine hard brittle materials [5] . In laser drilling of cooling holes, however, there always exists a conﬂict between quality and process- ∗ Corresponding author at: School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, No.28, Xianning West Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China. E-mail address: kdwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (K. Wang). ing eﬃciency. Traditional long-pulsed laser systems (millisecond and nanosecond) can always generate high ablation rates. However, laser- induced defects such as taper, spatter deposition, recast layer, heat af- fected zones (HAZ), and delamination along the interlayer interfaces always appear, leading to unreliable quality and reduced accuracy. In order to address the taper produced in laser drilling, the temporal pulse train modulation (TPTM) technology is considered to provide a solution. So far, TPTM has already been employed in laser welding [6,7] and laser drilling [8,9] . With the help of TPTM, material ejection can be regulated and the hole taper can be controlled by modifying the temporal pulse train. In order to prevent spatter deposition, a swirling gas jet was em- ployed and the method could eﬀectively reduce the spatter thickness and produce the least amount of spatter through regulation of the gas ﬂow characteristics [10] . Low et al. [11,12] developed an anti-spatter com- posite coating (ASCC) which could eﬀectively prevent the spatter depo- sition for various tested assistant gases. Other defects have been inves- tigated in several studies concerning laser drilling of coated/uncoated https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlaseng.2019.05.002 Received 8 September 2018; Received in revised form 30 April 2019; Accepted 1 May 2019 Available online 15 May 2019 0143-8166/© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

[PAGE 2] R. Wang, X. Dong and K. Wang et al. Optics and Lasers in Engineering 121 (2019) 406–415 Fig. 1. Schematic of the two-step processing method. (a) Step one and (b) step two materials [13–16] . However, such defects, including recast layer and delamination, seem to be unavoidable with conventional laser systems. The development of laser technology, especially of the chirped pulse ampliﬁcation (CPA) system, has led to the commercial availability of powerful and reliable femtosecond laser systems [17] . Due to the ex- tremely high-peak power and the extremely fast interaction between laser beam and materials, the irradiated materials undergo a direct solid- vapor transition or Coulomb explosion and hot electrons have no suﬃ- cient time to transfer energy to ions. As a result, the thermal eﬀect can be perfectly constrained. Due to this unique characteristic, ultra-short pulse laser systems have attracted lots of attention in the drilling of uncoated and coated materials [18,19] . The inherent defects associated with con- ventional laser drilling, such as recast layer, HAZ, and delamination, can be easily avoided by employing femtosecond laser drilling systems. Nev- ertheless, the disadvantage of ultra-short pulse laser drilling lies in its relatively low processing eﬃciency. A few minutes to dozens of minutes are required to complete the drilling process, depending on the thickness of the samples. This long time consumption has become very problem- atic due to the fact that there are thousands of ﬁlm cooling holes on modern aircraft engines [20] . Faced with such a dilemma, a full combination of the advantageous features of traditional and ultra-short laser systems seems to be a so- lution. However, the feasibility of this subject has been so far undeter- mined. In the present study, a two-step method was developed for im- proving the quality of laser micro-hole drilling of thermal barrier coated nickel base alloys. Through-holes were initially fabricated using mil- lisecond laser percussion drilling and afterwards, the side-wall of the holes was reﬁned by femtosecond laser trepanning. In step one, laser percussion drilling with TPTM was used to reduce the hole taper and minimize delamination. In step two, a femtosecond laser was used to remove the recast layer. Therefore, it is very important to fully under- stand the eﬀects of each parameter on hole quality. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Materials, equipment, and experimental design Fig. 1 illustrates the experimental mechanism of the two-step ap- proach used in the present study. The samples were ∼2 mm thick plates of Inconel 718 superalloys, which were coated with a ∼100 μm thick NiCrAlYTa bond coat (BC) and a 300 μm thick ceramic layer (yttria- stabilized zirconia, YSZ). The NiCrAlYTa bond coat was prepared by a modiﬁed GTV K2 low-temperature supersonic ﬂame spraying system, equipped with an IRB2400 ABB robot. The TBC layer was deposited by an atmospheric plasma spraying (APS, MF-P-1000, GTV, Germany) system. In step one, the laser percussion drilling process was accom- plished by a ﬁber-delivered pulsed JK 300D Nd:YAG laser (GSI, UK, 𝜆= 1064 nm). The laser pulse delivery system had both the normal pulse and the TPTM mode. For detailed characteristics of the laser source, one can refer to Ref. [22] . The laser beam had an approximate Gaussian spa- tial distribution and was focused through a 120 mm focal length lens. The focal spot was 240 μm in diameter and the Rayleigh length of the laser set-up was approximately 1.3 mm. For all tests, the focal plane was located on the surface of the sample and the laser beam was perpendic- ular to the surface of the material. In the drilling procedure, compressed air was used as the auxiliary gas, ﬂowing coaxially with the laser beam through a conical nozzle at a pressure of 0.5 MPa. In step two, trepan- ning drilling was conducted using a Ti:Sapphire femtosecond laser sys- tem (Spitﬁre Ace, Spectra-physics Inc., 𝜆= 800 nm), which can be seen in Fig. 1 (b). The laser system delivered 120-fs-width pulses with a max- imum average power of 5 W and a maximum repetition rate of 1 kHz. The laser pulse had a Gaussian spatial distribution with a beam quality factor of M 2 ∼1.3. The combination of a half-wave plate and a beam splitter was utilized to limit the input energy and avoid causing damage to the internal optical components. A pyroelectric detector was used in conjunction with a beam-splitter located along the primary laser path, in order to monitor the laser power in real-time. The laser beam was fo- cused vertically to the surface of the sample using a plano-convex lens with a focal length of 175 mm. The diameter of the focal spot, deﬁned by the intensity drop to e − 2 of the maximum value, was approximately 20 μm. The Rayleigh length in the laser setup was nearly 0.4 mm. The laser micro-fabrication motion system (Newport, USA) featured a reso- lution of 0.05 μm, a maximum XY speed of 300 mm/s, and a total travel distance (XYZ) of 100 mm × 100 mm × 5 mm. The motion system was equipped with an on-axis reﬂective light microscope for monitoring real-time laser processing. The experimental setup of the laser drilling systems are depicted in Fig. 2 . 2.2. Taper control and delamination suppression In order to reduce the hole taper and minimize delamination, the TPTM mode was adopted and the pulse train was carefully arranged. Ramp-up, uniform, and ramp-down pulse shapes were designed, as shown in Fig. 3 . The pulse sequence (H1, H2, etc.) constituted a macro pulse. In order to investigate the eﬀects of the diﬀerent pulse shapes on hole taper, the energy of the macro pulse remained constant. The applied pulse energy was 3.2 J by reference to Ref. [21] . At the initial drilling stage, the laser beam could generally penetrate through the TBC/BC or the BC/substrate interface within several pulses. According to a previ- ous study [22] , the thermal stress near the interfaces can be enhanced by the increase of the peak power; with the same pulse energy, a more intense thermal stress shock in the pulse cycles can be produced under a longer pulse duration and, due to the generation of excessive thermal stress, delamination cracks can even spread along the interfaces. There- fore, the laser processing parameters should be reasonably selected in the TPTM mode. The corresponding experimental design is shown in Table 1 . 2.3. Recast layer removal In step two, the on-axis reﬂective light microscope was used to fa- cilitate the positioning of the predrilled holes. The preset trepanning 407

[PAGE 3] R. Wang, X. Dong and K. Wang et al. Optics and Lasers in Engineering 121 (2019) 406–415 Fig. 2. Experimental setup of the laser drilling systems. (a) Millisecond laser system and (b) femtosecond laser system. Fig. 3. Designed pulse shapes - Ramp-up, uniform, and ramp- down Table 1 Experimental design in step one. Run Maximum peak power percentage Pulse shape Pulse duration (ms) H1 H2 H3 H4 H5 1 100% Normal 0.2 2 100% 100% Uniform 0.1 3 66.7% 66.7% 66.7% 4 50% 50% 50% 50% 5 40% 40% 40% 40% 40% 6 56.7% 66.7% 76.7% Ramp-up 0.1 7 35% 45% 55% 65% 8 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 9 76.7% 66.7% 56.7% Ramp-down 0.1 10 65% 55% 45% 35% 11 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% Repetition rate of macro pulses = 50 Hz. Number of macro pulses = 20 diameter was determined based on both the size of the predrilled holes and the thickness of the recast layer. An axial feed method was em- ployed to realize a complete removal of the recast layer along the side wall of the holes. 2.4. Material characterization After laser processing, the drilled samples were cleaned by ultrasonic bath in ethanol. The morphology of the drilled holes was acquired by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, S-3000N, HITACHI). The samples were polished by conventional metallographic procedures and cross- sections of the holes were recorded using SEM and an optical micro- scope. In order to reveal the recast layer, the samples were etched in a mixture of 500 ml hydrochloric acid with 35 ml sulfuric acid and 150 g copper sulfate for approximately 5 s after careful polishing. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Delamination crack distribution in step one In order to examine the relationship between peak power and de- lamination characteristics, the holes drilled between 40%–100% of the maximum peak power (MPP, 16 kW) are presented. The typical delam- ination characteristics are demonstrated in Fig. 4 (a). When the peak power was less than 60% of MPP, delamination cracks tended to appear at the BC/substrate interface. As it can be seen in Fig. 4 (b), when the peak power exceeded 60% of MPP, the delamination location shifted from the BC/substrate interface to the TBC/BC interface. When the peak power was less than 60% of MPP, due to a lower pulse energy, the laser processing was dominated by melting. The re- coil vapor pressure in the hole cavity was not high enough and most of the melt remained inside the hole. The side eﬀect was that the hole depth would not be further deepened, and its saturation would last for some time during laser processing. As a result, the melt was prone to be solidiﬁed again in the cavity. Especially when the melt front crossed the BC/substrate interface, the solidiﬁcation rate and solidiﬁcation se- quence of these two layers diﬀered, playing a key role in the formation of delamination cracks in this area. When the peak power was more than 60% of MPP, generally, the ﬁrst two layers could be penetrated within several pulses, and the crack at the TBC/BC interface was considered to be mainly caused by excessive thermal stress as a result of the intrinsic mismatch of material properties. This can be also clearly observed in Fig. 4 (c). When a high-enough peak power was used in the pulse train, 408

[PAGE 4] R. Wang, X. Dong and K. Wang et al. Optics and Lasers in Engineering 121 (2019) 406–415 Fig. 4. Preferred location of delamination cracks at 50%, 60%, and 70% of the maximum peak power (a). Correlation between delamination location and the applied peak power, shifting from the BC/substrate interface to the TBC/BC interface with the increase of peak power (b). Delamination location at diﬀerent runs (refer to Table 1 ) (c). the delamination cracks occurred always at the TBC/BC interface, as in runs 1, 2, 6, and 9. In these runs, the maximum peak power in the pulse train surpassed 70% of MPP, as seen in Table 1 . It was considered that the delamination location was independent of the pulse shape and de- pended largely on the peak power in the pulse train. For this reason, in the subsequent experimental study, the peak power in the pulse train was generally not more than 60% of MPP. 3.2. Hole taper aﬀected by the pulse shape in step one Since the diﬀerent pulse shapes can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the drilling process, it is necessary to correlate the relationship between hole ta- per and pulse shape. Fig. 5 (a) lists the entrance and exit diameters at diﬀerent runs and pulse shapes. It should be noted that, in the experi- ments, the exit diameter was generally greater than the entrance diame- ter. Based on these measurements, the hole taper was calculated by the following expression: Taper ( α) = ta n −1 |||| 𝑑 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 − 𝑑 𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡 2 ℎ |||| (1) where 𝛼is the taper angle in degrees, d entrance is the entrance diame- ter, d exit is the exit diameter, and h is the sample thickness. In general, both the entrance and exit diameters decreased with the increase of the number of pulse sequences for each pulse shape. Under the same pulse energy, the increase of pulse sequences in a single macro pulse led to a decrease in the maximum peak power acquired in the pulse train and a hole with small diameter could be fabricated. As it can be seen in Fig. 5 (b), the hole taper was considered to have a close relationship with the pulse shape. Under the uniform pulse shape, the hole taper de- creased with the increase of pulse sequences in a single macro pulse. In addition, a larger taper was produced with the ramp-up pulse shape, while a smaller taper was produced with the ramp-down pulse shape. When the ramp-up shape was used, the low peak power at the initial portion of the pulse induced a smaller inlet. As the pulse train proceeded, the energy coupling between the laser beam and the material was en- hanced, due to the increased eﬀective absorptivity associated with the geometry of the hole [6] . In addition, the amount of material removal increased due to the higher peak power levels at the remaining portions of the pulse train. Therefore, the outlet of the holes was larger with the ramp-up shape and the hole taper was further increased. In contrast, the ramp-down pulse shape could eﬀectively prevent further increase of taper. Firstly, the higher peak power at the initial portion of this pulse could provide an open and bright entrance for receiving the subsequent laser pulses. Secondly, the descending pulse sequence could still heat the molten pool in hole cavity, avoiding the sudden drop of vapor pres- sure. Thus, this pulse shape was conducive to the continuous upward ﬂow of the melt from the hole cavity. Moreover, the ramp-down pulse shape could inhibit the further expansion of the outlet diameter, due to the decrease of the peak power at the following portions of the pulse train. As a result, with this pulse shape, the taper can be quite small. 409

[PAGE 5] R. Wang, X. Dong and K. Wang et al. Optics and Lasers in Engineering 121 (2019) 406–415 Fig. 5. Hole entrance and exit diameter (a), and hole taper (b) at diﬀerent runs and pulse shapes (refer to Table 1 ). Fig. 6. Time interval of the pulse train. Table 2 Laser parameters. Run H1 H2 H3 H4 H5 Pulse duration (ms) Time interval (ms) 1 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.5 1 2 2 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.5 1 2 Repetition rate of macro pulses = 50 Hz 3.3. Eﬀect of the time interval of the pulse train on hole morphology In order to investigate the eﬀect of the time interval t int ( Fig. 6 ) of the pulse train on hole evolution, the corresponding experiment was conducted. The laser parameters are listed in Table 2 . Fig. 7 clearly demonstrates that the hole depth decreased with the increase of the time interval of the pulse train. Fig. 7. Hole depth under various time intervals at run 1 ( “grid- ding ”) and run 2 ( “slash ”) (refer to Table 2 ) after 50 macro pulses; the “horizontal line ” represents the sample thickness. 410

[PAGE 6] R. Wang, X. Dong and K. Wang et al. Optics and Lasers in Engineering 121 (2019) 406–415 Fig. 8. SEM images with cross-sections of holes under various time intervals at run 1 (refer to Table 2 ) after (a) 50 macro pulses and (b) 30 macro pulses; yellow-marked boxes denote re-closure of the holes and red-marked boxes denote skew of the holes. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Fig. 8 shows the cross-sections of the holes fabricated at run 1 (refer to Table 2 ). As shown in the SEM images, re-closure of the hole occurred when the time interval exceeded 1 ms, as marked by the yellow box. A skew phenomenon appeared in the lower part of the holes, when the time interval was 0.5 ms, as marked by the red box. Fig. 9 shows the schematic of the melt ﬂow mechanism in laser drilling with diﬀerent time intervals. The 0.5 ms interval was used to dis- tinguish the two diﬀerent ﬂow characteristics. It should be noted that the characteristic time was related to speciﬁc processing parameters. The vapor pressure exerted on the melt can be calculated according to the following equation [23] 𝑝 𝑣𝑎𝑝𝑜𝑟 = 𝑝 0 ⋅exp [ Δ𝑣𝑎𝑝 𝐻 𝑅 ( 1 𝑇 𝑣𝑎𝑝 − 1 𝑇 𝑠 ) ] (2) where Δvap H is the enthalpy of vaporization, R is a gas constant, T vap is the vaporization temperature of the melt at atmospheric pressure p 0 , and T s is the melt surface temperature. Based on Eq. (2) , the existence of vapor pressure lies in the maintenance of the melt surface tempera- ture. If the surface temperature of the melt decreased dramatically, the vapor pressure would drop signiﬁcantly. When the time interval was too long, the decrease in surface temperature of the melt occurred be- fore the following pulse sequence arrived. Due to the insuﬃcient va- por pressure, the melt began to fall from the upper part of the hole wall. As a result, closure occurred at the intersection of the upward and downward ﬂow in the molten pool ( Fig. 9 (a)). In contrast, the va- por pressure in the cavity could be maintained at a high level, when a short time interval was applied. Although a descending pulse was used, the subsequent pulse portions in the macro pulse could reheat the melt, preventing the vapor pressure from suddenly dropping. It was sug- gested that there would be a continuous upward ﬂow in the molten pool ( Fig. 9 (b)). The skew phenomenon appeared when the time interval was 0.5 ms. In addition, it was considered that also in the drilling process a closure phenomenon existed. However, it was not as serious as in the case of the 1 ms and 2 ms intervals. The closure occurred always in the deeper part of the hole. After closure, the solidiﬁed material was irregularly dis- tributed inside the cavity, causing scattering or deﬂection of the laser beam. Therefore, the skew phenomenon often appeared in the lower part of the holes. From the above discussion, it can be concluded that the re- closure of the holes drilled at longer time intervals, severely deteriorated the hole shape and reduced the processing eﬃciency. Short time inter- vals contributed to the promotion of both hole quality and processing eﬃciency. 411