[PAGE 1] Universal threshold for femtosecond laser ablation with oblique illumination Xiao-Long Liu,1, 2 Weibo Cheng,1 Massimo Petrarca,3 and Pavel Polynkin1, a) 1)College of Optical Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA 2)Academy of Opto-Electronics, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing 100094, China 3)La Sapienza University, SBAI Department, via A. Scarpa 14, 00161 Rome, Italy We quantify the dependence of the single-shot ablation threshold on the angle of incidence and polarization of a femtosecond laser beam, for three dissimilar solid-state materials: a metal, a dielectric and a semiconductor. Using the constant, linear value of the index of refraction, we calculate the laser ﬂuence transmitted through the air-material interface at the point of ablation threshold. We show that, in spite of the highly nonlinear ionization dynamics involved in the ablation process, the so deﬁned transmitted threshold ﬂuence is universally independent of the angle of incidence and polarization of the laser beam for all three material types. We suggest that angular dependence of ablation threshold can be utilized for proﬁling ﬂuence distributions in ultra-intense femtosecond laser beams. PACS numbers: 79.20.Eb, 42.25.Bs, 42.60.Jf Studies of femtosecond laser ablation are motivated both by its applications in micromachining and by the need to understand optical damage by intense femtosec- ond laser pulses. Virtually all of the prior studies have been conducted for the cases in which the ablating laser pulse strikes the surface of the material at normal an- gle of incidence (AOI). However, in practice, many if not most optical elements are used at oblique AOIs (most commonly at 45◦and at Brewster’s angle). In spite of the widespread use of optics with oblique incidence of the laser beam, there has been no systematic study reported on the dependence of ablation (or damage) threshold on the AOI for diﬀerent materials. The few prior investigations of femtosecond laser ab- lation at not-normal AOIs were focused on speciﬁc ap- plications. In particular, the dependence of the rate of ablation on the AOI and polarization for copper has been reported1. An eﬀective penetration depth of the laser ﬁeld into copper, diﬀerent from the penetration depth calculated classically using the complex index of refrac- tion, has been introduced to model the observed measure- ments. Ablation thresholds for polyimide ﬁlms, used as a model material for corneal tissue, has been quantiﬁed at various AOIs and polarizations2. In this paper, we report experimental results on the de- pendence of laser ablation threshold on the AOI and po- larization of the incident laser beam, for dissimilar solid- state materials: a metal, a dielectric and a semiconduc- tor. We ﬁnd that at large AOIs and for S-polarization, metals can be as resistant to optical damage as di- electrics. We show that the laser ﬂuence transmitted through the air-material interface, calculated as if the reﬂective and absorptive properties of the material were not aﬀected by the ablating laser pulse, is remarkably in- dependent of the AOI and polarization of the laser beam. Consequently, transmitted laser ﬂuence at the point of a)Electronic mail: ppolynkin@optics.arizona.edu ablation threshold can serve as a universal parameter that deﬁnes ablation threshold with oblique illumination. Furthermore, the dependence of ablation threshold on the AOI can be used for proﬁling ﬂuence distributions in ultra-intense laser beams. Our experiments make use of a commercial Ti:Sapphire ultrafast laser system that delivers 60 fs pulses with 4 mJ of energy per pulse at a pulse repetition rate of 1 kHz. The optical spectrum of the laser pulses is centered at 800 nm. The energy of the laser pulses used for ablation can be continuously varied by a half-wave plate followed by a reﬂection oﬀa glass wedge at Brewster’s angle. The orientation of the linear polarization of the laser beam incident on the sample is controlled via another half-wave plate. In our experiments, we investigated the cases of P- and S-polarizations, which correspond to the direction of the electric ﬁeld vector of the laser beam parallel and perpendicular to the plane of incidence, respectively. The 9 mm-diameter beam from the laser system is apertured down to 4 mm diameter and focused on the sample’s surface using a lens with a 50 mm focal length. The resulting 1/e2 beam diameter in the focal plane of the lens is 18 µm. We calculated that the proﬁle of the laser beam propagating linearly is very close to a Gaus- sian when it reaches the sample’s surface. The sample is attached to a manual rotation stage with the angu- lar accuracy of 0.1◦. The rotation stage is mounted on a computer-controlled motorized linear translation stage with the maximum travel speed of 50 mm/s, which en- ables ablation in the single-shot regime. Care is exercised in aligning the setup so that the front surface of the sam- ple always stays in the focal plane of the focusing lens while the sample is translated by the motorized stage. For each of the AOIs that we investigated, the surface of the sample remains within the beam’s Rayleigh range. For every particular value of AOI set by the rota- tion stage, we produce single-shot ablation marks with increasing values of energy of the ablating laser pulse. Ablation is performed in the ambient air. Shown in Fig- arXiv:1608.05884v2 [physics.optics] 28 Sep 2016

[PAGE 2] 2 ure 1 are example SEM images of the ablation craters for the case of a gold sample ablated by an S-polarized, 6.5 µJ pulse. The sample consists of a 1000 ˚A – thick gold layer deposited on a silicon wafer. The ablation craters have sharp and clearly deﬁned boundaries, which indi- cates that femtosecond laser ablation is a threshold pro- cess with respect to the local laser ﬂuence. As expected, the ellipticity of the craters grows as ∝1/cos(AOI) as the AOI is increased. In order to ﬁnd the value of ablation threshold ﬂuence at a particular AOI, we plot the lengths of the short and long axes of the elliptical ablation craters, squared, vs. the logarithm of the pulse energy. If the laser beam is Gaussian, these plots show linear dependence, with the slope equal to twice the 1/e2 beam radius squared; extrapolating the linear dependence of crater size out to zero yields the value of ablation threshold ﬂuence3. For our experimental data to be consistent, the fol- lowing four conditions need to be satisﬁed: (i) The de- pendencies of the lengths of the long and short axes of the elliptical ablation craters squared, on the logarithm of the pulse energy, are linear; (ii) the size of the laser beam incident on the sample, extracted from the slope of the data curve for the short axis, is independent of the AOI and equal to the focused beam size, which is calculated assuming linear propagation; (iii) the size of the beam extracted from the data for the long axis, mul- tiplied by the cos(AOI), is also independent of the AOI and equal to the focused beam size, calculated assuming linear propagation; (iv) the values of the ablation thresh- old ﬂuence obtained from the extrapolations of the data for the long and short axes, at a particular AOI, are equal to each other. All the data shown in this paper satisfy the above consistency criteria. Examples of the data ob- tained with a gold sample illuminated at 45◦AOI, for the cases of P- and S-polarizations of the ablating laser beam, are shown in Figure 2. We point out that these measurements need to be per- formed at suﬃciently low values of pulse energy, so that the length of the short axis of the elliptical ablation crater does not signiﬁcantly exceed the FWHM beam size of the incident beam. If the energy is too high and the corre- sponding length of the short axis signiﬁcantly exceeds the beam size, the deviations of the spatial beam proﬁle from the Gaussian shape, which are inevitably present at the periphery of the beam, will cause the dependence shown in Figure 2 to become nonlinear, thus increasing the uncertainty of the data extrapolation to zero crater 30° 0° 20 m 45° 55° 70° 20 m 20 m 20 m 20 m FIG. 1. SEM images of single-shot ablation craters produced on a gold surface by an S-polarized, 60 fs – long laser pulse with 6.5 µJ of energy at 800 nm wavelength, at diﬀerent angles of incidence, as indicated in the individual images. ln(Energy[J]) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 (Size of ablation)2 [m2] 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 P-polarization Long axis Short axis ln(Energy[J]) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 S-polarization Long axis Short axis FIG. 2. Examples of the data for the size of the ablation crater squared vs. logarithm of the energy of the ablating laser pulse, for the case of a gold sample illuminated at 45◦ AOI. The left and right panels show P- and S-polarizations of the incident laser beam, respectively. The two lines of data on each plot correspond to the long and short axes of the elliptical ablation crater. The experimental errors in these data are small compared to the size of the data symbols. size. We also point out that the peak ﬂuence on the beam axis can signiﬁcantly exceed the value of ablation threshold, thus enabling the onset of thermal eﬀects in ablation4 and material blow-oﬀ5; this is of no importance here, as we are not interested in the appearance of the center of the ablation crater, but only of its boundary, where the local laser ﬂuence is always equal to the abla- tion threshold ﬂuence. Even though our experiments are conducted in air, and air ionization may occur for some of the values of pulse energy that we use, the generated plasma has negligible eﬀect on the propagation of the laser beam towards the sample, because very tight focusing of the laser beam (with the corresponding f-number of 12.5) always dom- inates diﬀraction due to plasma. Accordingly, for all of the data shown in this paper, the laser beam diameter extracted from the slopes of the ablation curves, such as shown in Figure 2, is equal to the value calculated assuming linear propagation of the focused laser beam. Generally, the threshold for femtosecond laser abla- tion is reached when a speciﬁc amount of laser energy, per atom or molecule of the material, is absorbed in the top layer of the sample. This very general deﬁnition is independent of both the nature of the material and the speciﬁc ablation mechanism. (The actual value of energy absorbed per atom or molecule at threshold does depend on the nature of the material and ablation mechanism, but not on the AOI and polarization of the laser beam.) A rigorously computed value of ﬂuence, absorbed per particle in the top layer of the sample, is a complex and nonlinear but deﬁnitely monotomically growing function of the incident laser ﬂuence. Therefore it is natural to ex- pect that ablation threshold ﬂuence should be a growing function of the AOI, since the area of the sample that the incident ﬂuence is spread over increases as ∝cos(AOI). In what follows, we will present data for ablation threshold ﬂuence together with the corresponding values of thresh- old ﬂuence multiplied by the factor 1/cos (AOI), as well as the approximate values of threshold ﬂuence transmit- ted through the top surface of the material. Transmitted

[PAGE 3] 3 ﬂuence will be calculated using Fresnel formulas with the constant (linear) complex index of refraction, as if the op- tical properties of the material were not perturbed by the incident laser ﬁeld. Our results will show that transmit- ted ﬂuence, as calculated above, at the point of ablation threshold is universally independent of both the AOI and polarization of the laser beam even though the complex index of refraction of those materials can change signif- icantly within the duration of the ablating laser pulse6. We will discuss these ﬁndings after presenting our data. We start with the case of a metal. As in the cases shown in Figure 1 and 2, the sample is a 1000 ˚A – thick layer of gold deposited on a silicon wafer (sur- face ﬂatness λ/10). This ﬁlm thickness is large enough for the gold layer to respond to the near-infrared fem- tosecond laser excitation as bulk gold7. In Figure 3, we show data for the ablation threshold ﬂuence, at dif- ferent AOIs, together with the corresponding values of threshold ﬂuence multiplied by the factor 1/cos (AOI) and the corresponding transmitted ﬂuence, computed with the unperturbed complex index of refraction of gold n = 0.1886 + i · 4.7053, at 800 nm wavelength. In cal- culating the E-ﬁeld immediately below the gold surface we used the standard Fresnel formulas with a complex refractive index. For the case of a metal, the laser energy transmitted through the material surface is absorbed in the material entirely, therefore in this case transmitted ﬂuence is equivalent to absorbed ﬂuence. It is evident from the data that ablation threshold ﬂu- ence weakly depends on the AOI for P-polarization and is a growing function of the AOI for S-polarization. Thresh- old ﬂuence times cos(AOI) is a slightly decreasing func- tion of the AOI for P-polarization and is a growing func- tion of the AOI for S-polarization. However, the value of internal ﬂuence at the point of ablation threshold is invariant with respect to both the AOI and polarization of the incident laser beam. The value of ablation threshold ﬂuence for gold that we measure at normal incidence is (0.98 ± 0.05) J/cm2, which is close to the previously reported value7. Note that throughout this paper, we show the peak value of ablation threshold ﬂuence (on-axis ﬂuence), which, for a AOI (deg.) 0 20 40 60 80 Threshold fluence (J/cm2) 0 2 4 6 8 10 Incident beam Times cos(AOI) Internal field x 100 AOI (deg.) 0 20 40 60 80 Threshold fluence (J/cm2) 0 2 4 6 8 10 Incident beam Times cos(AOI) Internal field x 100 P-polarization S-polarization FIG. 3. Ablation threshold ﬂuence and the quantities related to it, vs. AOI for gold. The internal ﬂuence shown is multi- plied by 100, to make it visible on the plots. The experimental errors are due to the extrapolation uncertainty at large values of the AOI. AOI (deg.) 0 20 40 60 80 Threshold fluence (J/cm2) 0 2 4 6 8 10 Incident beam Times cos(AOI) Internal field AOI (deg.) 0 20 40 60 80 Threshold fluence (J/cm2) 0 2 4 6 8 10 Incident beam Times cos(AOI) Internal field P-polarization S-polarization FIG. 4. Same as in Figure 3, but for the case of soda-lime glass. Gaussian beam, is a factor of 2 larger than the average threshold ﬂuence used by some authors. The second case we consider is that of a wide-bandgap dielectric material – soda-lime glass. Our samples are standard microscope slides with surface ﬂatness of λ/4. Data for ablation threshold ﬂuence, together with the re- lated quantities, are shown in Figure 4. Here, the thresh- old ﬂuence is a growing function of the AOI for both polarizations. Also for both polarizations, the threshold ﬂuence multiplied by cos(AOI) is nearly independent of the AOI and so is the value of the transmitted ﬂuence at the point of ablation threshold. The transmitted ﬂuence is calculated using a constant, unperturbed-by-the-laser- ﬁeld, index of refraction of n = 1.45, with a negligibly small imaginary part. The value of ablation threshold ﬂuence for soda- lime glass that we measure at normal incidence is (2.03 ± 0.07) J/cm2. It is in good agreement with the value reported for borosilicate glass with 50 fs pulses at 780 nm wavelength8. The third material type we consider is a semiconduc- tor. Our sample is a commercial, un-doped, single-crystal (100) silicon wafer (the normal to the wafer’s polished surface is parallel to the [100] direction in the crystal lat- tice). To illuminate the sample at an oblique AOI, we tilt it by rotating it around the [011] direction; the plane of incidence for the laser beam is perpendicular to this di- rection. Contrary to the previous cases of gold (polycrys- talline) and glass (amorphous), silicon is a single-crystal, anisotropic material. Since silicon has a diamond-cubic crystal lattice, its optical properties are isotropic. How- ever, the anisotropy of the eﬀective electron mass in sil- icon may result in a dependence of ionization and abla- tion on the orientation of the crystal, as was previously shown for the case of multi-shot ablation9. The issue of ablation anisotropy that could result from the crystalline nature of silicon is beyond the scope of this paper. In Figure 5, we show ablation threshold ﬂuence, together with the related quantities, as functions of the AOI, for (100) silicon. As in the case of soda-lime glass discussed above, ablation threshold ﬂuence is a growing function of the AOI for both polarizations. The threshold ﬂuence times cos(AOI) is also an increasing function of the AOI for both polarizations. However, as in the cases of metal and glass, the internal laser ﬂuence at the point of abla-

[PAGE 4] 4 AOI (deg.) 0 20 40 60 80 Threshold fluence (J/cm2) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Incident beam Times cos(AOI) Internal field AOI (deg.) 0 20 40 60 80 Threshold fluence (J/cm2) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Incident beam Times cos(AOI) Internal field P-polarization S-polarization FIG. 5. Same as in Figures 3 and 4 but for the case of (100) silicon. tion threshold is invariant with respect to the AOI and polarization. Here, the internal ﬂuence is again calcu- lated using a constant (unperturbed by the laser ﬁeld) value of the complex index of refraction for silicon at 800 nm wavelength, n = 3.6959 + i · 0.0047. The value of ablation threshold ﬂuence for (100) silicon that we measure at normal incidence is (0.13 ± 0.02) J/cm2. It is of the same order of magni- tude as the value obtained through the extrapolation of the multi-shot threshold for the formation of nano-ripples on (100) silicon to the number of laser shots equal to one11. We are not aware of any previously reported data for single-shot ablation thresholds for (100) silicon with ∼50 fs laser pulses at 800 nm wavelength that can be di- rectly compared with our results. As pointed out above, the value of the absorbed laser energy per particle at ablation threshold should be inde- pendent of the AOI and polarization. In general, ﬂuence absorbed in the top layer of the sample is a complex and nonlinear function of the incident laser ﬂuence, as both reﬂective and absorptive properties of the material are transiently altered by the ablating laser pulse. Our data empirically show that the quantity equal to the transmit- ted laser ﬂuence, computed as if the reﬂective properties of the sample were unchanged through the interaction of the sample with the laser pulse, is nearly independent of the AOI and polarization. For the case of gold, such an observation is expected, as reﬂective and absorptive prop- erties of gold weakly change during the interaction. In the cases of glass and silicon, we argue that transmission of the incident laser energy into the sample decreases, while absorption in the top layer of the sample increases, as the sample is ionized by the laser pulse. Our data em- pirically show that the two eﬀects compensate each other to a large degree. A known dependence of ablation threshold ﬂuence on the AOI can be used for the measurements of transverse ﬂuence distributions in ultra-intense laser beams, such as femtosecond beams propagating in air in the self- channeling (ﬁlamentation) regime12. For example, the data for gold illuminated with S-polarized light shown in Figure 3 suggest that gold can be used for proﬁling intense laser beams in the range of ﬂuences from 1 to 9 J/cm2. For 50 fs FWHM pulse duration, this range of ﬂuence corresponds to the range of peak power from 20 to 170 TW/cm2. In conclusion, we have experimentally investigated the dependence of threshold ﬂuence for single-shot femtosec- ond laser ablation on the angle of incidence and polariza- tion of the ablating laser beam. We have found that for optically dissimilar materials (metal, glass, semiconduc- tor), the value of ﬂuence transmitted into the material at the point of ablation threshold, if calculated using the linear (unperturbed by the laser ﬁeld) complex index of refraction, is nearly independent of the angle of incidence and polarization. We suggest that the dependence of ab- lation threshold ﬂuence on the angle of incidence can be utilized for proﬁling ﬂuence distributions in ultra-intense laser beams in the range from a fraction of 1 J/cm2 up to about 10 J/cm2. We thank Dr. Colm Dineen for helpful discussions and Mr. Lee Johnson and Prof. Thomas Milster for the as- sistance with operating the electron microscope. This work was supported by the United States Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research under programs FA9550-12-1-0482 and FA9550-16-1-0013 and by the US Defense Threat Reduction Agency under program HDTRA 1-14-1-0009. X.-L. Liu acknowledges the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grants No. 11404335 and No. 91538113. 1Y. Miyasaka, M. Hashida, T. Nishii, S. Inoue, S. Sakabe, Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 013101 (2015). 2B. S. Haq, H. U. Khan, K. Alam, M Mateenullah, S. Attaulah, I. Zari, Appl. Opt. 54, 7413 (2015). 3J. M. Liu, Opt. Lett. 7, 196 (1982). 4S. Nolte, C. Momma, H. Jackobs, A. T¨unnermann, B. N. Chichkov, B. Wellegehausen, H. Welling, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2716 (1997). 5D. Bouilly, D. Perez, L. J. Lewis, Phys. Rev. B 76, 184119 (2007). 6K. Sokolowski-Tinten, J. Bialkowski, M. Boing, A. Cavalleri, D. von der Linde, Phys. Rev. B 58, R11805 (1998). 7B. Stewart, M. Feit, S. Herman, A. Rubenchik, B. Shore, M. Perry, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 13, 459 (1996). 8W. Kautek, J. Kr¨uger, M. Lenzner, S. Sartania, C. Spielmann, F. Krausz, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 3146 (1996). 9X. Li, W. Rong, L. Jiang, K. Zhang, C. Li, Q. Cao, G. Zhang, Y. Lu, Opt. Exp. 22, 30170 (2014). 10S. He, J. Nivas, A. Vecchione, M. Hu, S. Amoruso, Opt. Exp. 24, 3238 (2016). 11S. He, J. J. J. Nivas, A. Vecchione, M. Hu, S. Amoruso, Opt. Exp. 24, 3238 (2016). 12A. Couairon, A. Mysyrowicz, Phys. Rep. 441, 47 (2007).